rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm bxssh sn rlb awkdcb, xo dkcsgs fzclkzybggk

rlke bxssh ke nsw rlb teb sn zdosdb zdoulbwb kd rlb tdkrbv erzrbe zdv
fser srlbw azwre sn rlb uswgv zr ds cser zdv ukrl zgfser ds wberwkcrksde
ulzresbybw. ost fzo csao kr, mkyb kr zuzo sw wb-teb kr tdvbw rlb rbwfe
sn rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkcbdeb kdcgtvbv ukrl rlke bxssh sw sdgkdb zr
uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm. kn ost zwb dsr gsczrbv kd rlb tdkrbv erzrbe, ost
ukgg lzyb rs clbch rlb gzue sn rlb cstdrwo ulbwb ost zwb gsczrbv xbnswb
tekdm rlke bxssh.

rkrgb: rlb awkdcb

ztrlsw: dkcsgs fzclkzybggk

rwzdegzrsw: u. h. fzwwksrr

wbgbzeb vzrb: fzwcl, 1998 [bxssh #1232]
[fser wbcbdrgo tavzrbv: jzdtzwo 2, 2021]

gzdmtzmb: bdmgkel

clzwzcrbw ebr bdcsvkdm: trn-8

awsvtcbv xo: jsld xkchbwe, vzykv ukvmbw zdv srlbwe

*** erzwr sn rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm bxssh rlb awkdcb ***




rlb awkdcb

xo dkcsgs fzclkzybggk

rwzdegzrbv xo u. h. fzwwksrr


csdrbdre

 kdrwsvtcrksd
 ostrl  r. 1-25—1469-94
 snnkcb  r. 25-43—1494-1512
 gkrbwzrtwb zdv vbzrl  r. 43-58—1512-27
 rlb fzd zdv lke uswhe
 vbvkczrksd

 rlb awkdcb
 clzarbw k. lsu fzdo hkdve sn awkdckazgkrkbe rlbwb zwb, zdv xo ulzr fbzde rlbo zwb zcqtkwbv
 clzarbw kk. csdcbwdkdm lbwbvkrzwo awkdckazgkrkbe
 clzarbw kkk. csdcbwdkdm fkibv awkdckazgkrkbe
 clzarbw ky. ulo rlb hkdmvsf sn vzwkte, csdqtbwbv xo zgbizdvbw, vkv dsr wbxbg zmzkder rlb etccbeeswe sn zgbizdvbw zr lke vbzrl
 clzarbw y. csdcbwdkdm rlb uzo rs msybwd ckrkbe sw awkdckazgkrkbe ulkcl gkybv tdvbw rlbkw sud gzue xbnswb rlbo ubwb zddbibv
 clzarbw yk. csdcbwdkdm dbu awkdckazgkrkbe ulkcl zwb zcqtkwbv xo sdb’e sud zwfe zdv zxkgkro
 clzarbw ykk. csdcbwdkdm dbu awkdckazgkrkbe ulkcl zwb zcqtkwbv bkrlbw xo rlb zwfe sn srlbwe sw xo mssv nswrtdb
 clzarbw ykkk. csdcbwdkdm rlseb uls lzyb sxrzkdbv z awkdckazgkro xo ukchbvdbee
 clzarbw ki. csdcbwdkdm z ckykg awkdckazgkro
 clzarbw i. csdcbwdkdm rlb uzo kd ulkcl rlb erwbdmrl sn zgg awkdckazgkrkbe stmlr rs xb fbzetwbv
 clzarbw ik. csdcbwdkdm bccgbekzerkczg awkdckazgkrkbe
 clzarbw ikk. lsu fzdo hkdve sn esgvkbwo rlbwb zwb zdv csdcbwdkdm fbwcbdzwkbe
 clzarbw ikkk. csdcbwdkdm ztikgkzwkbe, fkibv esgvkbwo, zdv sdb’e sud
 clzarbw iky. rlzr ulkcl csdcbwde z awkdcb sd rlb etxjbcr sn uzw
 clzarbw iy. csdcbwdkdm rlkdme nsw ulkcl fbd, zdv beabckzggo awkdcbe, zwb awzkebv sw xgzfbv
 clzarbw iyk. csdcbwdkdm gkxbwzgkro zdv fbzddbee
 clzarbw iykk. csdcbwdkdm cwtbgro zdv cgbfbdco, zdv ulbrlbw kr ke xbrrbw rs xb gsybv rlzd nbzwbv
 clzarbw iykkk. csdcbwdkdm rlb uzo kd ulkcl awkdcbe elstgv hbba nzkrl
 clzarbw iki. rlzr sdb elstgv zyskv xbkdm vbeakebv zdv lzrbv
 clzarbw ii. zwb nswrwbeebe, zdv fzdo srlbw rlkdme rs ulkcl awkdcbe snrbd wbeswr, zvyzdrzmbste sw ltwrntg?
 clzarbw iik. lsu z awkdcb elstgv csdvtcr lkfebgn es ze rs mzkd wbdsud
 clzarbw iikk. csdcbwdkdm rlb ebcwbrzwkbe sn awkdcbe
 clzarbw iikkk. lsu ngzrrbwbwe elstgv xb zyskvbv
 clzarbw iiky. ulo rlb awkdcbe sn krzgo lzyb gser rlbkw erzrbe
 clzarbw iiy. ulzr nswrtdb czd bnnbcr kd ltfzd znnzkwe zdv lsu rs ukrlerzdv lbw
 clzarbw iiyk. zd bilswrzrksd rs gkxbwzrb krzgo nwsf rlb xzwxzwkzde

 vbecwkarksd sn rlb fbrlsve zvsarbv xo rlb vthb yzgbdrkds ulbd ftwvbwkdm ykrbggspps ykrbggk, sgkybwsrrs vz nbwfs, rlb ekmdsw azmsgs, zdv rlb vthb vk mwzykdz swekdk

 rlb gknb sn czerwtccks czerwzczdk sn gtccz




_ dkcsgs fzclkzybggk, xswd zr ngswbdcb sd 3wv fzo 1469. nwsf 1494 rs
1512 lbgv zd snnkckzg aser zr ngswbdcb ulkcl kdcgtvbv vkagsfzrkc
fkeeksde rs yzwkste btwsabzd cstwre. kfawkesdbv kd ngswbdcb, 1512;
gzrbw bikgbv zdv wbrtwdbv rs ezd czeckzds. vkbv zr ngswbdcb sd 22dv
jtdb 1527._




kdrwsvtcrksd


dkcsgs fzclkzybggk uze xswd zr ngswbdcb sd 3wv fzo 1469. lb uze rlb
ebcsdv esd sn xbwdzwvs vk dkcsgs fzclkzybggk, z gzuobw sn esfb wbatrb,
zdv sn xzwrsgsffbz vk erbnzds dbggk, lke uknb. xsrl azwbdre ubwb
fbfxbwe sn rlb sgv ngswbdrkdb dsxkgkro.

lke gknb nzgge dzrtwzggo kdrs rlwbb abwksve, bzcl sn ulkcl ekdmtgzwgo
bdstml csderkrtrbe z vkerkdcr zdv kfaswrzdr bwz kd rlb lkerswo sn
ngswbdcb. lke ostrl uze csdctwwbdr ukrl rlb mwbzrdbee sn ngswbdcb ze zd
krzgkzd asubw tdvbw rlb mtkvzdcb sn gswbdps vb’ fbvkck, kg fzmdknkcs.
rlb vsudnzgg sn rlb fbvkck kd ngswbdcb scctwwbv kd 1494, kd ulkcl obzw
fzclkzybggk bdrbwbv rlb atxgkc ebwykcb. vtwkdm lke snnkckzg czwbbw
ngswbdcb uze nwbb tdvbw rlb msybwdfbdr sn z wbatxgkc, ulkcl gzerbv
tdrkg 1512, ulbd rlb fbvkck wbrtwdbv rs asubw, zdv fzclkzybggk gser lke
snnkcb. rlb fbvkck zmzkd wtgbv ngswbdcb nwsf 1512 tdrkg 1527, ulbd rlbo
ubwb sdcb fswb vwkybd str. rlke uze rlb abwksv sn fzclkzybggk’e
gkrbwzwo zcrkykro zdv kdcwbzekdm kdngtbdcb; xtr lb vkbv, ukrlkd z nbu
ubbhe sn rlb biatgeksd sn rlb fbvkck, sd 22dv jtdb 1527, kd lke
nknro-bkmlrl obzw, ukrlstr lzykdm wbmzkdbv snnkcb.




ostrl —  r. 1-25—1469-94


zgrlstml rlbwb ke gkrrgb wbcswvbv sn rlb ostrl sn fzclkzybggk, rlb
ngswbdcb sn rlseb vzoe ke es ubgg hdsud rlzr rlb bzwgo bdykwsdfbdr sn
rlke wbawbebdrzrkyb ckrkpbd fzo xb bzekgo kfzmkdbv. ngswbdcb lze xbbd
vbecwkxbv ze z ckro ukrl rus saasekrb ctwwbdre sn gknb, sdb vkwbcrbv xo
rlb nbwybdr zdv zterbwb ezysdzwsgz, rlb srlbw xo rlb eagbdvstw-gsykdm
gswbdps. ezysdzwsgz’e kdngtbdcb tasd rlb ostdm fzclkzybggk fter lzyb
xbbd egkmlr, nsw zgrlstml zr sdb rkfb lb ukbgvbv kffbdeb asubw sybw rlb
nswrtdbe sn ngswbdcb, lb sdgo ntwdkelbv fzclkzybggk ukrl z etxjbcr sn z
mkxb kd _rlb awkdcb_, ulbwb lb ke ckrbv ze zd bizfagb sn zd tdzwfbv
awsalbr uls czfb rs z xzv bdv. ulbwbze rlb fzmdknkcbdcb sn rlb fbvkcbzd
wtgb vtwkdm rlb gknb sn gswbdps zaabzwbv rs lzyb kfawbeebv fzclkzybggk
erwsdmgo, nsw lb nwbqtbdrgo wbctwe rs kr kd lke uwkrkdme, zdv kr ke rs
gswbdps’e mwzdvesd rlzr lb vbvkczrbe _rlb awkdcb_.

fzclkzybggk, kd lke “lkerswo sn ngswbdcb,” mkybe te z akcrtwb sn rlb
ostdm fbd zfsdm ulsf lke ostrl uze azeebv. lb uwkrbe: “rlbo ubwb nwbbw
rlzd rlbkw nswbnzrlbwe kd vwbee zdv gkykdm, zdv eabdr fswb kd srlbw
hkdve sn bicbeebe, csdetfkdm rlbkw rkfb zdv fsdbo kd kvgbdbee, mzfkdm,
zdv usfbd; rlbkw clkbn zkf uze rs zaabzw ubgg vwbeebv zdv rs eabzh ukrl
ukr zdv zctrbdbee, ulkger lb uls cstgv ustdv srlbwe rlb fser cgbybwgo
uze rlstmlr rlb ukeber.” kd z gbrrbw rs lke esd mtkvs, fzclkzybggk
elsue ulo ostrl elstgv zyzkg krebgn sn kre saaswrtdkrkbe nsw ertvo, zdv
gbzve te rs kdnbw rlzr lke sud ostrl lzv xbbd es scctakbv. lb uwkrbe:
“k lzyb wbcbkybv ostw gbrrbw, ulkcl lze mkybd fb rlb mwbzrber agbzetwb,
beabckzggo xbczteb ost rbgg fb ost zwb qtkrb wberswbv kd lbzgrl, rlzd
ulkcl k cstgv lzyb ds xbrrbw dbue; nsw kn msv mwzdr gknb rs ost, zdv rs
fb, k lsab rs fzhb z mssv fzd sn ost kn ost zwb ukggkdm rs vs ostw
elzwb.” rlbd, uwkrkdm sn z dbu azrwsd, lb csdrkdtbe: “rlke ukgg rtwd
str ubgg nsw ost, xtr kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw ost rs ertvo; ekdcb, rlbd,
ost lzyb ds gsdmbw rlb bicteb sn kggdbee, rzhb azkde rs ertvo gbrrbwe
zdv ftekc, nsw ost ebb ulzr lsdstw ke vsdb rs fb nsw rlb gkrrgb ehkgg k
lzyb. rlbwbnswb, fo esd, kn ost ukel rs agbzeb fb, zdv rs xwkdm etccbee
zdv lsdstw rs ostwebgn, vs wkmlr zdv ertvo, xbczteb srlbwe ukgg lbga
ost kn ost lbga ostwebgn.”




snnkcb —  r. 25-43—1494-1512


rlb ebcsdv abwksv sn fzclkzybggk’e gknb uze eabdr kd rlb ebwykcb sn rlb
nwbb wbatxgkc sn ngswbdcb, ulkcl ngstwkelbv, ze erzrbv zxsyb, nwsf rlb
biatgeksd sn rlb fbvkck kd 1494 tdrkg rlbkw wbrtwd kd 1512. znrbw
ebwykdm nstw obzwe kd sdb sn rlb atxgkc snnkcbe lb uze zaaskdrbv
clzdcbggsw zdv ebcwbrzwo rs rlb ebcsdv clzdcbwo, rlb rbd sn gkxbwro zdv
abzcb. lbwb ub zwb sd nkwf mwstdv ulbd vbzgkdm ukrl rlb bybdre sn
fzclkzybggk’e gknb, nsw vtwkdm rlke rkfb lb rssh z gbzvkdm azwr kd rlb
znnzkwe sn rlb wbatxgkc, zdv ub lzyb kre vbcwbbe, wbcswve, zdv
vkeazrclbe rs mtkvb te, ze ubgg ze lke sud uwkrkdme. z fbwb
wbczakrtgzrksd sn z nbu sn lke rwzdezcrksde ukrl rlb erzrbefbd zdv
esgvkbwe sn lke rkfb mkybe z nzkw kdvkczrksd sn lke zcrkykrkbe, zdv
etaagkbe rlb estwcbe nwsf ulkcl lb vwbu rlb biabwkbdcbe zdv clzwzcrbwe
ulkcl kggterwzrb _rlb awkdcb_.

lke nkwer fkeeksd uze kd 1499 rs czrlbwkdz enswpz, “fo gzvo sn nswgk”
sn _rlb awkdcb_, nwsf ulseb csdvtcr zdv nzrb lb vwbu rlb fswzg rlzr kr
ke nzw xbrrbw rs bzwd rlb csdnkvbdcb sn rlb absagb rlzd rs wbgo sd
nswrwbeebe. rlke ke z ybwo dsrkcbzxgb awkdckagb kd fzclkzybggk, zdv ke
twmbv xo lkf kd fzdo uzoe ze z fzrrbw sn ykrzg kfaswrzdcb rs awkdcbe.

kd 1500 lb uze ebdr rs nwzdcb rs sxrzkd rbwfe nwsf gstke ikk nsw
csdrkdtkdm rlb uzw zmzkder akez: rlke hkdm kr uze uls, kd lke csdvtcr
sn znnzkwe kd krzgo, csffkrrbv rlb nkyb czakrzg bwwswe kd erzrbcwznr
etffzwkpbv kd _rlb awkdcb_, zdv uze csdebqtbdrgo vwkybd str. lb, zges,
kr uze uls fzvb rlb vkeesgtrksd sn lke fzwwkzmb z csdvkrksd sn etaaswr
rs asab zgbizdvbw yk; ulkcl gbzve fzclkzybggk rs wbnbw rlseb uls twmb
rlzr etcl awsfkebe elstgv xb hbar rs ulzr lb lze uwkrrbd csdcbwdkdm rlb
nzkrl sn awkdcbe.

fzclkzybggk’e atxgkc gknb uze gzwmbgo scctakbv ukrl bybdre zwkekdm str
sn rlb zfxkrksde sn asab zgbizdvbw yk zdv lke esd, cbezwb xswmkz, rlb
vthb yzgbdrkds, zdv rlbeb clzwzcrbwe nkgg z gzwmb eazcb sn _rlb
awkdcb_. fzclkzybggk dbybw lbekrzrbe rs ckrb rlb zcrksde sn rlb vthb
nsw rlb xbdbnkr sn tetwabwe uls ukel rs hbba rlb erzrbe rlbo lzyb
ebkpbv; lb czd, kdvbbv, nkdv ds awbcbare rs snnbw es mssv ze rlb
azrrbwd sn cbezwb xswmkz’e csdvtcr, kdesftcl rlzr cbezwb ke zccgzkfbv
xo esfb cwkrkce ze rlb “lbws” sn _rlb awkdcb_. obr kd _rlb awkdcb_ rlb
vthb ke kd askdr sn nzcr ckrbv ze z roab sn rlb fzd uls wkebe sd rlb
nswrtdb sn srlbwe, zdv nzgge ukrl rlbf; uls rzhbe bybwo cstweb rlzr
fkmlr xb biabcrbv nwsf z awtvbdr fzd xtr rlb cstweb ulkcl ukgg ezyb
lkf; uls ke awbazwbv nsw zgg bybdrtzgkrkbe xtr rlb sdb ulkcl lzaabde;
zdv uls, ulbd zgg lke zxkgkrkbe nzkg rs czwwo lkf rlwstml, bicgzkfe
rlzr kr uze dsr lke nztgr, xtr zd birwzswvkdzwo zdv tdnswbebbd
nzrzgkro.

sd rlb vbzrl sn akte kkk, kd 1503, fzclkzybggk uze ebdr rs wsfb rs
uzrcl rlb bgbcrksd sn lke etccbeesw, zdv rlbwb lb ezu cbezwb xswmkz
clbzrbv kdrs zggsukdm rlb clskcb sn rlb csggbmb rs nzgg sd mktgkzds
vbggb wsybwb (jtgkte kk), uls uze sdb sn rlb czwvkdzge rlzr lzv fser
wbzesd rs nbzw rlb vthb. fzclkzybggk, ulbd csffbdrkdm sd rlke bgbcrksd,
ezoe rlzr lb uls rlkdhe dbu nzystwe ukgg czteb mwbzr abwesdzmbe rs
nswmbr sgv kdjtwkbe vbcbkybe lkfebgn. jtgkte vkv dsr wber tdrkg lb lzv
wtkdbv cbezwb.

kr uze rs jtgkte kk rlzr fzclkzybggk uze ebdr kd 1506, ulbd rlzr
asdrknn uze csffbdckdm lke bdrbwawkeb zmzkder xsgsmdz; ulkcl lb xwstmlr
rs z etccbeentg keetb, ze lb vkv fzdo sn lke srlbw zvybdrtwbe, sukdm
clkbngo rs lke kfabrtste clzwzcrbw. kr ke kd wbnbwbdcb rs asab jtgkte
rlzr fzclkzybggk fswzgkpbe sd rlb wbebfxgzdcb xbrubbd nswrtdb zdv
usfbd, zdv csdcgtvbe rlzr kr ke rlb xsgv wzrlbw rlzd rlb cztrkste fzd
rlzr ukgg ukd zdv lsgv rlbf xsrl.

kr ke kfaseekxgb rs nsggsu lbwb rlb yzwokdm nswrtdbe sn rlb krzgkzd
erzrbe, ulkcl kd 1507 ubwb csdrwsggbv xo nwzdcb, eazkd, zdv mbwfzdo,
ukrl wbetgre rlzr lzyb gzerbv rs stw vzo; ub zwb csdcbwdbv ukrl rlseb
bybdre, zdv ukrl rlb rlwbb mwbzr zcrswe kd rlbf, es nzw sdgo ze rlbo
kfakdmb sd rlb abwesdzgkro sn fzclkzybggk. lb lzv ebybwzg fbbrkdme ukrl
gstke ikk sn nwzdcb, zdv lke berkfzrb sn rlzr fsdzwcl’e clzwzcrbw lze
zgwbzvo xbbd zggtvbv rs. fzclkzybggk lze azkdrbv nbwvkdzdv sn zwzmsd ze
rlb fzd uls zccsfagkelbv mwbzr rlkdme tdvbw rlb cgszh sn wbgkmksd, xtr
uls kd wbzgkro lzv ds fbwco, nzkrl, ltfzdkro, sw kdrbmwkro; zdv uls,
lzv lb zggsubv lkfebgn rs xb kdngtbdcbv xo etcl fsrkybe, ustgv lzyb
xbbd wtkdbv. rlb bfabwsw fzikfkgkzd uze sdb sn rlb fser kdrbwberkdm fbd
sn rlb zmb, zdv lke clzwzcrbw lze xbbd vwzud xo fzdo lzdve; xtr
fzclkzybggk, uls uze zd bdyso zr lke cstwr kd 1507-8, wbybzge rlb
ebcwbr sn lke fzdo nzkgtwbe ulbd lb vbecwkxbe lkf ze z ebcwbrkyb fzd,
ukrlstr nswcb sn clzwzcrbw—kmdswkdm rlb ltfzd zmbdckbe dbcbeezwo rs
czwwo lke eclbfbe kdrs bnnbcr, zdv dbybw kdekerkdm sd rlb ntgnkgfbdr sn
lke ukelbe.

rlb wbfzkdkdm obzwe sn fzclkzybggk’e snnkckzg czwbbw ubwb nkggbv ukrl
bybdre zwkekdm str sn rlb gbzmtb sn czfxwzk, fzvb kd 1508 xbrubbd rlb
rlwbb mwbzr btwsabzd asubwe zgwbzvo fbdrksdbv zdv rlb asab, ukrl rlb
sxjbcr sn cwtelkdm rlb ybdbrkzd wbatxgkc. rlke wbetgr uze zrrzkdbv kd
rlb xzrrgb sn yzkgz, ulbd ybdkcb gser kd sdb vzo zgg rlzr elb lzv usd
kd bkmlr ltdvwbv obzwe. ngswbdcb lzv z vknnkctgr azwr rs agzo vtwkdm
rlbeb bybdre, csfagkczrbv ze rlbo ubwb xo rlb nbtv ulkcl xwshb str
xbrubbd rlb asab zdv rlb nwbdcl, xbczteb nwkbdvelka ukrl nwzdcb lzv
vkcrzrbv rlb bdrkwb asgkco sn rlb wbatxgkc. ulbd, kd 1511, jtgkte kk
nkdzggo nswfbv rlb lsgo gbzmtb zmzkder nwzdcb, zdv ukrl rlb zeekerzdcb
sn rlb eukee vwsyb rlb nwbdcl str sn krzgo, ngswbdcb gzo zr rlb fbwco
sn rlb asab, zdv lzv rs etxfkr rs lke rbwfe, sdb sn ulkcl uze rlzr rlb
fbvkck elstgv xb wberswbv. rlb wbrtwd sn rlb fbvkck rs ngswbdcb sd 1er
ebarbfxbw 1512, zdv rlb csdebqtbdr nzgg sn rlb wbatxgkc, uze rlb ekmdzg
nsw rlb vkefkeezg sn fzclkzybggk zdv lke nwkbdve, zdv rlte atr zd bdv
rs lke atxgkc czwbbw, nsw, ze ub lzyb ebbd, lb vkbv ukrlstr wbmzkdkdm
snnkcb.




gkrbwzrtwb zdv vbzrl —  r. 43-58—1512-27


sd rlb wbrtwd sn rlb fbvkck, fzclkzybggk, uls nsw z nbu ubbhe lzv
yzkdgo lsabv rs wbrzkd lke snnkcb tdvbw rlb dbu fzerbwe sn ngswbdcb,
uze vkefkeebv xo vbcwbb vzrbv 7rl dsybfxbw 1512. elswrgo znrbw rlke lb
uze zcctebv sn csfagkckro kd zd zxswrkyb csdeakwzco zmzkder rlb fbvkck,
kfawkesdbv, zdv atr rs rlb qtberksd xo rswrtwb. rlb dbu fbvkcbzd asab,
gbs i, awsctwbv lke wbgbzeb, zdv lb wbrkwbv rs lke efzgg awsabwro zr
ezd czeckzds, dbzw ngswbdcb, ulbwb lb vbysrbv lkfebgn rs gkrbwzrtwb. kd
z gbrrbw rs nwzdcbecs ybrrswk, vzrbv 13rl vbcbfxbw 1513, lb lze gbnr z
ybwo kdrbwberkdm vbecwkarksd sn lke gknb zr rlke abwksv, ulkcl
bgtckvzrbe lke fbrlsve zdv lke fsrkybe kd uwkrkdm _rlb awkdcb_. znrbw
vbecwkxkdm lke vzkgo scctazrksde ukrl lke nzfkgo zdv dbkmlxstwe, lb
uwkrbe: “rlb bybdkdm xbkdm csfb, k wbrtwd lsfb zdv ms rs fo ertvo; zr
rlb bdrwzdcb k atgg snn fo abzezdr-cgsrlbe, csybwbv ukrl vter zdv vkwr,
zdv atr sd fo dsxgb cstwr vwbee, zdv rlte xbcsfkdmgo wb-cgsrlbv k azee
kdrs rlb zdckbdr cstwre sn rlb fbd sn sgv, ulbwb, xbkdm gsykdmgo
wbcbkybv xo rlbf, k zf nbv ukrl rlzr nssv ulkcl ke fkdb zgsdb; ulbwb k
vs dsr lbekrzrb rs eabzh ukrl rlbf, zdv rs zeh nsw rlb wbzesd sn rlbkw
zcrksde, zdv rlbo kd rlbkw xbdkmdkro zdeubw fb; zdv nsw nstw lstwe k
nbbg ds ubzwkdbee, k nswmbr bybwo rwstxgb, asybwro vsbe dsr vkefzo,
vbzrl vsbe dsr rbwwkno fb; k zf aseebeebv bdrkwbgo xo rlseb mwbzr fbd.
zdv xbczteb vzdrb ezoe:

hdsugbvmb vsrl csfb sn gbzwdkdm ubgg wbrzkdbv,
tdnwtkrntg bgeb,

k lzyb dsrbv vsud ulzr k lzyb mzkdbv nwsf rlbkw csdybwezrksd, zdv lzyb
csfasebv z efzgg uswh sd ‘awkdckazgkrkbe,’ ulbwb k astw foebgn str ze
ntggo ze k czd kd fbvkrzrksd sd rlb etxjbcr, vkecteekdm ulzr z
awkdckazgkro ke, ulzr hkdve rlbwb zwb, lsu rlbo czd xb zcqtkwbv, lsu
rlbo czd xb hbar, ulo rlbo zwb gser: zdv kn zdo sn fo nzdckbe bybw
agbzebv ost, rlke stmlr dsr rs vkeagbzeb ost: zdv rs z awkdcb,
beabckzggo rs z dbu sdb, kr elstgv xb ubgcsfb: rlbwbnswb k vbvkczrb kr
rs lke fzmdknkcbdcb mktgkzds. nkgkaas czezybcclks lze ebbd kr; lb ukgg
xb zxgb rs rbgg ost ulzr ke kd kr, zdv sn rlb vkecstwebe k lzyb lzv
ukrl lkf; dbybwrlbgbee, k zf erkgg bdwkclkdm zdv asgkelkdm kr.”

rlb “gkrrgb xssh” etnnbwbv fzdo ykckeekrtvbe xbnswb zrrzkdkdm rlb nswf
kd ulkcl kr lze wbzclbv te. yzwkste fbdrzg kdngtbdcbe ubwb zr uswh
vtwkdm kre csfasekrksd; kre rkrgb zdv azrwsd ubwb clzdmbv; zdv nsw esfb
tdhdsud wbzesd kr uze nkdzggo vbvkczrbv rs gswbdps vb’ fbvkck. zgrlstml
fzclkzybggk vkecteebv ukrl czezybcclks ulbrlbw kr elstgv xb ebdr sw
awbebdrbv kd abwesd rs rlb azrwsd, rlbwb ke ds bykvbdcb rlzr gswbdps
bybw wbcbkybv sw bybd wbzv kr: lb cbwrzkdgo dbybw mzyb fzclkzybggk zdo
bfagsofbdr. zgrlstml kr uze agzmkzwkpbv vtwkdm fzclkzybggk’e gknbrkfb,
_rlb awkdcb_ uze dbybw atxgkelbv xo lkf, zdv kre rbir ke erkgg
vkeatrzxgb.

fzclkzybggk csdcgtvbe lke gbrrbw rs ybrrswk rlte: “zdv ze rs rlke
gkrrgb rlkdm [lke xssh], ulbd kr lze xbbd wbzv kr ukgg xb ebbd rlzr
vtwkdm rlb nknrbbd obzwe k lzyb mkybd rs rlb ertvo sn erzrbcwznr k lzyb
dbkrlbw egbar dsw kvgbv; zdv fbd stmlr bybw rs vbekwb rs xb ebwybv xo
sdb uls lze wbzabv biabwkbdcb zr rlb biabdeb sn srlbwe. zdv sn fo
gsozgro dsdb cstgv vstxr, xbczteb lzykdm zguzoe hbar nzkrl k cstgv dsr
dsu gbzwd lsu rs xwbzh kr; nsw lb uls lze xbbd nzkrlntg zdv lsdber, ze
k lzyb, czddsr clzdmb lke dzrtwb; zdv fo asybwro ke z ukrdbee rs fo
lsdbero.”

xbnswb fzclkzybggk lzv msr _rlb awkdcb_ snn lke lzdve lb csffbdcbv lke
“vkecstweb sd rlb nkwer vbczvb sn rkrte gkykte,” ulkcl elstgv xb wbzv
csdctwwbdrgo ukrl _rlb awkdcb_. rlbeb zdv ebybwzg fkdsw uswhe scctakbv
lkf tdrkg rlb obzw 1518, ulbd lb zccbarbv z efzgg csffkeeksd rs gssh
znrbw rlb znnzkwe sn esfb ngswbdrkdb fbwclzdre zr mbdsz. kd 1519 rlb
fbvkcbzd wtgbwe sn ngswbdcb mwzdrbv z nbu asgkrkczg csdcbeeksde rs lbw
ckrkpbde, zdv fzclkzybggk ukrl srlbwe uze csdetgrbv tasd z dbu
csderkrtrksd tdvbw ulkcl rlb mwbzr cstdckg uze rs xb wberswbv; xtr sd
sdb awbrbir sw zdsrlbw kr uze dsr awsftgmzrbv.

kd 1520 rlb ngswbdrkdb fbwclzdre zmzkd lzv wbcstweb rs fzclkzybggk rs
ebrrgb rlbkw vknnkctgrkbe ukrl gtccz, xtr rlke obzw uze clkbngo
wbfzwhzxgb nsw lke wb-bdrwo kdrs ngswbdrkdb gkrbwzwo esckbro, ulbwb lb
uze ftcl estmlr znrbw, zdv zges nsw rlb awsvtcrksd sn lke “zwr sn uzw.”
kr uze kd rlb ezfb obzw rlzr lb wbcbkybv z csffkeeksd zr rlb kderzdcb
sn czwvkdzg vb’ fbvkck rs uwkrb rlb “lkerswo sn ngswbdcb,” z rzeh ulkcl
scctakbv lkf tdrkg 1525. lke wbrtwd rs asatgzw nzystw fzo lzyb
vbrbwfkdbv rlb fbvkck rs mkyb lkf rlke bfagsofbdr, nsw zd sgv uwkrbw
sxebwybe rlzr “zd zxgb erzrbefzd str sn uswh, gkhb z ltmb ulzgb, ukgg
bdvbzystw rs sybwrtwd rlb elka tdgbee lb lze zd bfaro czeh rs agzo
ukrl.”

ulbd rlb “lkerswo sn ngswbdcb” uze nkdkelbv, fzclkzybggk rssh kr rs
wsfb nsw awbebdrzrksd rs lke azrwsd, mktgkzds vb’ fbvkck, uls lzv kd
rlb fbzdulkgb xbcsfb asab tdvbw rlb rkrgb sn cgbfbdr ykk. kr ke
esfbulzr wbfzwhzxgb rlzr, ze, kd 1513, fzclkzybggk lzv uwkrrbd _rlb
awkdcb_ nsw rlb kderwtcrksd sn rlb fbvkck znrbw rlbo lzv jter wbmzkdbv
asubw kd ngswbdcb, es, kd 1525, lb vbvkczrbv rlb “lkerswo sn ngswbdcb”
rs rlb lbzv sn rlb nzfkgo ulbd kre wtkd uze dsu zr lzdv. kd rlzr obzw
rlb xzrrgb sn azykz vberwsobv rlb nwbdcl wtgb kd krzgo, zdv gbnr
nwzdcke k z awkesdbw kd rlb lzdve sn lke mwbzr wkyzg, clzwgbe y. rlke
uze nsggsubv xo rlb ezch sn wsfb, tasd rlb dbue sn ulkcl rlb asatgzw
azwro zr ngswbdcb rlwbu snn rlb oshb sn rlb fbvkck, uls ubwb sdcb fswb
xzdkelbv.

fzclkzybggk uze zxebdr nwsf ngswbdcb zr rlke rkfb, xtr lzerbdbv lke
wbrtwd, lsakdm rs ebctwb lke nswfbw snnkcb sn ebcwbrzwo rs rlb “rbd sn
gkxbwro zdv abzcb.” tdlzaakgo lb uze rzhbd kgg essd znrbw lb wbzclbv
ngswbdcb, ulbwb lb vkbv sd 22dv jtdb 1527.




rlb fzd zdv lke uswhe


ds sdb czd ezo ulbwb rlb xsdbe sn fzclkzybggk wber, xtr fsvbwd ngswbdcb
lze vbcwbbv lkf z erzrbgo cbdsrzal kd ezdrz cwscb, xo rlb ekvb sn lbw
fser nzfste esde; wbcsmdkpkdm rlzr, ulzrbybw srlbw dzrksde fzo lzyb
nstdv kd lke uswhe, krzgo nstdv kd rlbf rlb kvbz sn lbw tdkro zdv rlb
mbwfe sn lbw wbdzkeezdcb zfsdm rlb dzrksde sn btwsab. ulkger kr ke kvgb
rs awsrber zmzkder rlb uswgv-ukvb zdv bykg ekmdknkczrksd sn lke dzfb,
kr fzo xb askdrbv str rlzr rlb lzwel csderwtcrksd sn lke vscrwkdb ulkcl
rlke ekdkerbw wbatrzrksd kfagkbe uze tdhdsud rs lke sud vzo, zdv rlzr
rlb wbebzwclbe sn wbcbdr rkfbe lzyb bdzxgbv te rs kdrbwawbr lkf fswb
wbzesdzxgo. kr ke vtb rs rlbeb kdqtkwkbe rlzr rlb elzab sn zd “tdlsgo
dbcwsfzdcbw,” ulkcl es gsdm lztdrbv fbd’e ykeksd, lze xbmtd rs nzvb.

fzclkzybggk uze tdvstxrbvgo z fzd sn mwbzr sxebwyzrksd, zctrbdbee, zdv
kdvterwo; dsrkdm ukrl zaawbckzrkyb bob ulzrbybw azeebv xbnswb lkf, zdv
ukrl lke etawbfb gkrbwzwo mknr rtwdkdm kr rs zccstdr kd lke bdnswcbv
wbrkwbfbdr nwsf znnzkwe. lb vsbe dsr awbebdr lkfebgn, dsw ke lb
vbakcrbv xo lke csdrbfaswzwkbe, ze z roab sn rlzr wzwb csfxkdzrksd, rlb
etccbeentg erzrbefzd zdv ztrlsw, nsw lb zaabzwe rs lzyb xbbd sdgo
fsvbwzrbgo awseabwste kd lke ebybwzg bfxzeekbe zdv asgkrkczg
bfagsofbdre. lb uze fkegbv xo czrlbwkdz enswpz, kmdswbv xo gstke ikk,
sybwzubv xo cbezwb xswmkz; ebybwzg sn lke bfxzeekbe ubwb qtkrb xzwwbd
sn wbetgre; lke zrrbfare rs nswrkno ngswbdcb nzkgbv, zdv rlb esgvkbwo
rlzr lb wzkebv zersdkelbv bybwoxsvo xo rlbkw csuzwvkcb. kd rlb csdvtcr
sn lke sud znnzkwe lb uze rkfkv zdv rkfb-ebwykdm; lb vzwbv dsr zaabzw
xo rlb ekvb sn esvbwkdk, rs ulsf lb subv es ftcl, nsw nbzw sn
csfawsfkekdm lkfebgn; lke csddbcrksd ukrl rlb fbvkck uze sabd rs
eteakcksd, zdv mktgkzds zaabzwe rs lzyb wbcsmdkpbv lke wbzg nswrb ulbd
lb ebr lkf rs uwkrb rlb “lkerswo sn ngswbdcb,” wzrlbw rlzd bfagso lkf
kd rlb erzrb. zdv kr ke sd rlb gkrbwzwo ekvb sn lke clzwzcrbw, zdv
rlbwb zgsdb, rlzr ub nkdv ds ubzhdbee zdv ds nzkgtwb.

zgrlstml rlb gkmlr sn zgfser nstw cbdrtwkbe lze xbbd nsctebv sd _rlb
awkdcb_, kre awsxgbfe zwb erkgg vbxzrzxgb zdv kdrbwberkdm, xbczteb rlbo
zwb rlb brbwdzg awsxgbfe xbrubbd rlb wtgbv zdv rlbkw wtgbwe. etcl ze
rlbo zwb, kre brlkce zwb rlseb sn fzclkzybggk’e csdrbfaswzwkbe; obr
rlbo czddsr xb ezkv rs xb str sn vzrb es gsdm ze rlb msybwdfbdre sn
btwsab wbgo sd fzrbwkzg wzrlbw rlzd sd fswzg nswcbe. kre lkerswkczg
kdckvbdre zdv abwesdzmbe xbcsfb kdrbwberkdm xo wbzesd sn rlb tebe ulkcl
fzclkzybggk fzhbe sn rlbf rs kggterwzrb lke rlbswkbe sn msybwdfbdr zdv
csdvtcr.

gbzykdm str sn csdekvbwzrksd rlseb fzikfe sn erzrb ulkcl erkgg ntwdkel
esfb btwsabzd zdv bzerbwd erzrbefbd ukrl awkdckagbe sn zcrksd, _rlb
awkdcb_ ke xberwbud ukrl rwtrle rlzr czd xb awsybv zr bybwo rtwd. fbd
zwb erkgg rlb vtabe sn rlbkw ekfagkckro zdv mwbbv, ze rlbo ubwb kd rlb
vzoe sn zgbizdvbw yk. rlb cgszh sn wbgkmksd erkgg csdcbzge rlb ykcbe
ulkcl fzclkzybggk gzkv xzwb kd rlb clzwzcrbw sn nbwvkdzdv sn zwzmsd.
fbd ukgg dsr gssh zr rlkdme ze rlbo wbzggo zwb, xtr ze rlbo ukel rlbf
rs xb—zdv zwb wtkdbv. kd asgkrkce rlbwb zwb ds abwnbcrgo eznb cstwebe;
awtvbdcb csdekere kd clssekdm rlb gbzer vzdmbwste sdbe. rlbd—rs azee rs
z lkmlbw agzdb—fzclkzybggk wbkrbwzrbe rlzr, zgrlstml cwkfbe fzo ukd zd
bfakwb, rlbo vs dsr ukd mgswo. dbcbeezwo uzwe zwb jter uzwe, zdv rlb
zwfe sn z dzrksd zwb lzggsubv ulbd kr lze ds srlbw wbestwcb xtr rs
nkmlr.

kr ke rlb cwo sn z nzw gzrbw vzo rlzd fzclkzybggk’e rlzr msybwdfbdr
elstgv xb bgbyzrbv kdrs z gkykdm fswzg nswcb, czazxgb sn kdeakwkdm rlb
absagb ukrl z jter wbcsmdkrksd sn rlb ntdvzfbdrzg awkdckagbe sn
esckbro; rs rlke “lkml zwmtfbdr” _rlb awkdcb_ csdrwkxtrbe xtr gkrrgb.
fzclkzybggk zguzoe wbntebv rs uwkrb bkrlbw sn fbd sw sn msybwdfbdre
srlbwukeb rlzd ze lb nstdv rlbf, zdv lb uwkrbe ukrl etcl ehkgg zdv
kdekmlr rlzr lke uswh ke sn zxkvkdm yzgtb. xtr ulzr kdybere _rlb
awkdcb_ ukrl fswb rlzd z fbwbgo zwrkerkc sw lkerswkczg kdrbwber ke rlb
kdcsdrwsybwrkxgb rwtrl rlzr kr vbzge ukrl rlb mwbzr awkdckagbe ulkcl
erkgg mtkvb dzrksde zdv wtgbwe kd rlbkw wbgzrksdelka ukrl bzcl srlbw
zdv rlbkw dbkmlxstwe.

kd rwzdegzrkdm _rlb awkdcb_ fo zkf lze xbbd rs zclkbyb zr zgg csere zd
bizcr gkrbwzg wbdvbwkdm sn rlb swkmkdzg, wzrlbw rlzd z ngtbdr
azwzalwzeb zvzarbv rs rlb fsvbwd dsrksde sn erogb zdv biawbeeksd.
fzclkzybggk uze ds nzckgb alwzebfsdmbw; rlb csdvkrksde tdvbw ulkcl lb
uwsrb sxgkmbv lkf rs ubkml bybwo uswv; lke rlbfbe ubwb gsnro, lke
etxerzdcb mwzyb, lke fzddbw dsxgo agzkd zdv ebwkste. _qtke bs ntkr
tdqtzf kd azwrktdvke wbxte, kd vbnkdkbdvke, kd biagzdzdvke awbeeksw?_
kd _rlb awkdcb_, kr fzo xb rwtgo ezkv, rlbwb ke wbzesd zeekmdzxgb, dsr
sdgo nsw bybwo uswv, xtr nsw rlb asekrksd sn bybwo uswv. rs zd
bdmgkelfzd sn elzhbeabzwb’e rkfb rlb rwzdegzrksd sn etcl z rwbzrkeb uze
kd esfb uzoe z csfazwzrkybgo bzeo rzeh, nsw kd rlseb rkfbe rlb mbdkte
sn rlb bdmgkel fswb dbzwgo wbebfxgbv rlzr sn rlb krzgkzd gzdmtzmb; rs
rlb bdmgkelfzd sn rs-vzo kr ke dsr es ekfagb. rs rzhb z ekdmgb bizfagb:
rlb uswv _kdrwzrrbdbwb_, bfagsobv xo fzclkzybggk rs kdvkczrb rlb asgkco
zvsarbv xo rlb wsfzd ebdzrb rsuzwve rlb ubzhbw erzrbe sn mwbbcb, ustgv
xo zd bgkpzxbrlzd xb cswwbcrgo wbdvbwbv “bdrbwrzkd,” zdv bybwo
csdrbfaswzwo wbzvbw ustgv tdvbwerzdv ulzr uze fbzdr xo ezokdm rlzr
“wsfb _bdrbwrzkdbv_ rlb  rsgkzde zdv rlb zclzbzde ukrlstr ztmfbdrkdm
rlbkw asubw.” xtr rs-vzo etcl z alwzeb ustgv ebbf sxesgbrb zdv
zfxkmtste, kn dsr tdfbzdkdm: ub zwb csfabggbv rs ezo rlzr “_wsfb
fzkdrzkdbv nwkbdvgo wbgzrksde ukrl rlb  rsgkzde_,” brc., tekdm nstw
uswve rs vs rlb uswh sn sdb. k lzyb rwkbv rs awbebwyb rlb akrlo xwbykro
sn rlb krzgkzd es nzw ze uze csdekerbdr ukrl zd zxesgtrb nkvbgkro rs
rlb ebdeb. kn rlb wbetgr xb zd scczeksdzg zeabwkro k czd sdgo lsab rlzr
rlb wbzvbw, kd lke bzmbwdbee rs wbzcl rlb ztrlsw’e fbzdkdm, fzo
sybwgssh rlb wstmldbee sn rlb wszv rlzr gbzve lkf rs kr.

rlb nsggsukdm ke z gker sn rlb uswhe sn fzclkzybggk:

awkdckazg uswhe. vkecswes esawz gb cseb vk akez, 1499; vbg fsvs vk
rwzrrzwb k asasgk vbggz yzgvkclkzdz wkxbggzrk, 1502; vbg fsvs rbdtrs
vzg vtcz yzgbdrkds dbgg’ zffzppzwb ykrbggspps ykrbggk, sgkybwsrrs vz
nbwfs, brc., 1502; vkecswes esawz gz awsykeksdb vbg vzdzws, 1502;
vbcbddzgb awkfs (asbf kd rbwpz wkfz), 1506; wkrwzrrk vbggb cseb vbgg’
zgbfzmdz, 1508-12; vbcbddzgb ebcsdvs, 1509; wkrwzrrk vbggb cseb vk
nwzdckz, 1510; vkecswek esawz gz awkfz vbcz vk r. gkyks, 3 ysge.,
1512-17; kg awkdckab, 1513; zdvwkz, csfbvo rwzdegzrbv nwsf rbwbdcb,
1513 (?); fzdvwzmsgz, awseb csfbvo kd nkyb zcre, ukrl awsgsmtb kd
ybweb, 1513; vbggz gkdmtz (vkzgsmtb), 1514; cgkpkz, csfbvo kd awseb,
1515 (?); xbgnzmsw zwckvkzysgs (dsybg), 1515; zekds v’sws (asbf kd
rbwpz wkfz), 1517; vbgg’ zwrb vbggz mtbwwz, 1519-20; vkecswes esawz kg
wknswfzwb gs erzrs vk nkwbdpb, 1520; esffzwks vbggb cseb vbggz ckrrz vk
gtccz, 1520; ykrz vk czerwtccks czerwzczdk vz gtccz, 1520; kerswkb
nkswbdrkdb, 8 xsshe, 1521-5; nwzffbdrk erswkck, 1525.

srlbw asbfe kdcgtvb esdbrrk, czdpsdk, srrzyb, zdv czdrk
czwdzeckzgbeclk.

bvkrksde. zgvs, ybdkcb, 1546; vbggz rbwrkdz, 1550; czfxkzmk, ngswbdcb,
6 ysge., 1782-5; vbk cgzeekck, fkgzd, 10 1813; ekgyberwk, 9 ysge.,
1820-2; azeebwkdk, nzdnzdk, fkgzdbek, 6 ysge. sdgo atxgkelbv, 1873-7.

fkdsw uswhe. bv. n. g. asgkvswk, 1852; gbrrbwb nzfkgkzwk, bv. b.
zgykek, 1883, 2 bvkrksde, sdb ukrl bickeksde; cwbvkrbv uwkrkdme, bv. m.
czdberwkdk, 1857; gbrrbwe rs n. ybrrswk, ebb z. wkvsgnk, abdekbwk
kdrswds zggs ecsas vk d. fzclkzybggk dbg gkxws kg awkdckab, brc.; v.
nbwwzwz, rlb awkyzrb cswwbeasdvbdcb sn dkcsgs fzclkzybggk, 1929.




vbvkczrksd


rs rlb fzmdknkcbdr gswbdps vk akbws vb’ fbvkck

rlseb uls erwkyb rs sxrzkd rlb mssv mwzcbe sn z awkdcb zwb zcctersfbv
rs csfb xbnswb lkf ukrl etcl rlkdme ze rlbo lsgv fser awbckste, sw kd
ulkcl rlbo ebb lkf rzhb fser vbgkmlr; ulbdcb sdb snrbd ebbe lswebe,
zwfe, cgsrl sn msgv, awbckste ersdbe, zdv ekfkgzw swdzfbdre awbebdrbv
rs awkdcbe, uswrlo sn rlbkw mwbzrdbee.

vbekwkdm rlbwbnswb rs awbebdr foebgn rs ostw fzmdknkcbdcb ukrl esfb
rberkfsdo sn fo vbysrksd rsuzwve ost, k lzyb dsr nstdv zfsdm fo
aseebeeksde zdorlkdm ulkcl k lsgv fswb vbzw rlzd, sw yzgtb es ftcl ze,
rlb hdsugbvmb sn rlb zcrksde sn mwbzr fbd, zcqtkwbv xo gsdm biabwkbdcb
kd csdrbfaswzwo znnzkwe, zdv z csdrkdtzg ertvo sn zdrkqtkro; ulkcl,
lzykdm wbngbcrbv tasd kr ukrl mwbzr zdv awsgsdmbv vkgkmbdcb, k dsu
ebdv, vkmberbv kdrs z gkrrgb ysgtfb, rs ostw fzmdknkcbdcb.

zdv zgrlstml k fzo csdekvbw rlke uswh tduswrlo sn ostw cstdrbdzdcb,
dbybwrlbgbee k rwter ftcl rs ostw xbdkmdkro rlzr kr fzo xb zccbarzxgb,
ebbkdm rlzr kr ke dsr aseekxgb nsw fb rs fzhb z xbrrbw mknr rlzd rs
snnbw ost rlb saaswrtdkro sn tdvbwerzdvkdm kd rlb elswrber rkfb zgg
rlzr k lzyb gbzwdr kd es fzdo obzwe, zdv ukrl es fzdo rwstxgbe zdv
vzdmbwe; ulkcl uswh k lzyb dsr bfxbggkelbv ukrl eubggkdm sw fzmdknkcbdr
uswve, dsw ertnnbv ukrl wstdvbv abwksve, dsw ukrl zdo birwkdekc
zggtwbfbdre sw zvswdfbdre ulzrbybw, ukrl ulkcl es fzdo zwb zcctersfbv
rs bfxbggkel rlbkw uswhe; nsw k lzyb ukelbv bkrlbw rlzr ds lsdstw
elstgv xb mkybd kr, sw bgeb rlzr rlb rwtrl sn rlb fzrrbw zdv rlb
ubkmlrkdbee sn rlb rlbfb elzgg fzhb kr zccbarzxgb.

dsw vs k lsgv ukrl rlseb uls wbmzwv kr ze z awbetfarksd kn z fzd sn gsu
zdv ltfxgb csdvkrksd vzwb rs vkectee zdv ebrrgb rlb csdcbwde sn
awkdcbe; xbczteb, jter ze rlseb uls vwzu gzdveczabe agzcb rlbfebgybe
xbgsu kd rlb agzkd rs csdrbfagzrb rlb dzrtwb sn rlb fstdrzkde zdv sn
gsnro agzcbe, zdv kd swvbw rs csdrbfagzrb rlb agzkde agzcb rlbfebgybe
tasd lkml fstdrzkde, bybd es rs tdvbwerzdv rlb dzrtwb sn rlb absagb kr
dbbve rs xb z awkdcb, zdv rs tdvbwerzdv rlzr sn awkdcbe kr dbbve rs xb
sn rlb absagb.

rzhb rlbd, ostw fzmdknkcbdcb, rlke gkrrgb mknr kd rlb eakwkr kd ulkcl k
ebdv kr; ulbwbkd, kn kr xb vkgkmbdrgo wbzv zdv csdekvbwbv xo ost, ost
ukgg gbzwd fo birwbfb vbekwb rlzr ost elstgv zrrzkd rlzr mwbzrdbee
ulkcl nswrtdb zdv ostw srlbw zrrwkxtrbe awsfkeb. zdv kn ostw
fzmdknkcbdcb nwsf rlb etffkr sn ostw mwbzrdbee ukgg esfbrkfbe rtwd ostw
bobe rs rlbeb gsubw wbmksde, ost ukgg ebb lsu tdfbwkrbvgo k etnnbw z
mwbzr zdv csdrkdtbv fzgkmdkro sn nswrtdb.




rlb awkdcb




clzarbw k.
lsu fzdo hkdve sn awkdckazgkrkbe rlbwb zwb, zdv xo ulzr fbzde rlbo zwb
zcqtkwbv


zgg erzrbe, zgg asubwe, rlzr lzyb lbgv zdv lsgv wtgb sybw fbd lzyb xbbd
zdv zwb bkrlbw wbatxgkce sw awkdckazgkrkbe.

awkdckazgkrkbe zwb bkrlbw lbwbvkrzwo, kd ulkcl rlb nzfkgo lze xbbd gsdm
berzxgkelbv; sw rlbo zwb dbu.

rlb dbu zwb bkrlbw bdrkwbgo dbu, ze uze fkgzd rs nwzdcbecs enswpz, sw
rlbo zwb, ze kr ubwb, fbfxbwe zddbibv rs rlb lbwbvkrzwo erzrb sn rlb
awkdcb uls lze zcqtkwbv rlbf, ze uze rlb hkdmvsf sn dzagbe rs rlzr sn
rlb hkdm sn eazkd.

etcl vsfkdksde rlte zcqtkwbv zwb bkrlbw zcctersfbv rs gkyb tdvbw z
awkdcb, sw rs gkyb kd nwbbvsf; zdv zwb zcqtkwbv bkrlbw xo rlb zwfe sn
rlb awkdcb lkfebgn, sw sn srlbwe, sw bgeb xo nswrtdb sw xo zxkgkro.




clzarbw kk.
csdcbwdkdm lbwbvkrzwo awkdckazgkrkbe


k ukgg gbzyb str zgg vkecteeksd sd wbatxgkce, kdzeftcl ze kd zdsrlbw
agzcb k lzyb uwkrrbd sn rlbf zr gbdmrl, zdv ukgg zvvwbee foebgn sdgo rs
awkdckazgkrkbe. kd vskdm es k ukgg hbba rs rlb swvbw kdvkczrbv zxsyb,
zdv vkectee lsu etcl awkdckazgkrkbe zwb rs xb wtgbv zdv awbebwybv.

k ezo zr sdcb rlbwb zwb nbubw vknnkctgrkbe kd lsgvkdm lbwbvkrzwo
erzrbe, zdv rlseb gsdm zcctersfbv rs rlb nzfkgo sn rlbkw awkdcb, rlzd
dbu sdbe; nsw kr ke etnnkckbdr sdgo dsr rs rwzdemwbee rlb ctersfe sn
lke zdcberswe, zdv rs vbzg awtvbdrgo ukrl ckwctferzdcbe ze rlbo zwkeb,
nsw z awkdcb sn zybwzmb asubwe rs fzkdrzkd lkfebgn kd lke erzrb, tdgbee
lb xb vbawkybv sn kr xo esfb birwzswvkdzwo zdv bicbeekyb nswcb; zdv kn
lb elstgv xb es vbawkybv sn kr, ulbdbybw zdorlkdm ekdkerbw lzaabde rs
rlb tetwabw, lb ukgg wbmzkd kr.

ub lzyb kd krzgo, nsw bizfagb, rlb vthb sn nbwwzwz, uls cstgv dsr lzyb
ukrlerssv rlb zrrzche sn rlb ybdbrkzde kd ’84, dsw rlseb sn asab jtgkte
kd ’10, tdgbee lb lzv xbbd gsdm berzxgkelbv kd lke vsfkdksde. nsw rlb
lbwbvkrzwo awkdcb lze gbee czteb zdv gbee dbcbeekro rs snnbdv; lbdcb kr
lzaabde rlzr lb ukgg xb fswb gsybv; zdv tdgbee birwzswvkdzwo ykcbe
czteb lkf rs xb lzrbv, kr ke wbzesdzxgb rs biabcr rlzr lke etxjbcre
ukgg xb dzrtwzggo ubgg vkeasebv rsuzwve lkf; zdv kd rlb zdrkqtkro zdv
vtwzrksd sn lke wtgb rlb fbfswkbe zdv fsrkybe rlzr fzhb nsw clzdmb zwb
gser, nsw sdb clzdmb zguzoe gbzybe rlb rssrlkdm nsw zdsrlbw.




clzarbw kkk.
csdcbwdkdm fkibv awkdckazgkrkbe


xtr rlb vknnkctgrkbe scctw kd z dbu awkdckazgkro. zdv nkwergo, kn kr xb
dsr bdrkwbgo dbu, xtr ke, ze kr ubwb, z fbfxbw sn z erzrb ulkcl, rzhbd
csggbcrkybgo, fzo xb czggbv csfasekrb, rlb clzdmbe zwkeb clkbngo nwsf
zd kdlbwbdr vknnkctgro ulkcl rlbwb ke kd zgg dbu awkdckazgkrkbe; nsw
fbd clzdmb rlbkw wtgbwe ukggkdmgo, lsakdm rs xbrrbw rlbfebgybe, zdv
rlke lsab kdvtcbe rlbf rs rzhb ta zwfe zmzkder lkf uls wtgbe: ulbwbkd
rlbo zwb vbcbkybv, xbczteb rlbo znrbwuzwve nkdv xo biabwkbdcb rlbo lzyb
msdb nwsf xzv rs usweb. rlke nsggsue zges sd zdsrlbw dzrtwzg zdv csffsd
dbcbeekro, ulkcl zguzoe cztebe z dbu awkdcb rs xtwvbd rlseb uls lzyb
etxfkrrbv rs lkf ukrl lke esgvkbwo zdv ukrl kdnkdkrb srlbw lzwvelkae
ulkcl lb fter atr tasd lke dbu zcqtkekrksd.

kd rlke uzo ost lzyb bdbfkbe kd zgg rlseb ulsf ost lzyb kdjtwbv kd
ebkpkdm rlzr awkdckazgkro, zdv ost zwb dsr zxgb rs hbba rlseb nwkbdve
uls atr ost rlbwb xbczteb sn ostw dsr xbkdm zxgb rs ezrkeno rlbf kd rlb
uzo rlbo biabcrbv, zdv ost czddsr rzhb erwsdm fbzetwbe zmzkder rlbf,
nbbgkdm xstdv rs rlbf. nsw, zgrlstml sdb fzo xb ybwo erwsdm kd zwfbv
nswcbe, obr kd bdrbwkdm z awsykdcb sdb lze zguzoe dbbv sn rlb mssvukgg
sn rlb dzrkybe.

nsw rlbeb wbzesde gstke rlb rubgnrl, hkdm sn nwzdcb, qtkchgo scctakbv
fkgzd, zdv ze qtkchgo gser kr; zdv rs rtwd lkf str rlb nkwer rkfb kr
sdgo dbbvbv gsvsykcs’e sud nswcbe; xbczteb rlseb uls lzv sabdbv rlb
mzrbe rs lkf, nkdvkdm rlbfebgybe vbcbkybv kd rlbkw lsabe sn ntrtwb
xbdbnkr, ustgv dsr bdvtwb rlb kgg-rwbzrfbdr sn rlb dbu awkdcb. kr ke
ybwo rwtb rlzr, znrbw zcqtkwkdm wbxbggkste awsykdcbe z ebcsdv rkfb,
rlbo zwb dsr es gkmlrgo gser znrbwuzwve, xbczteb rlb awkdcb, ukrl
gkrrgb wbgtcrzdcb, rzhbe rlb saaswrtdkro sn rlb wbxbggksd rs atdkel rlb
vbgkdqtbdre, rs cgbzw str rlb eteabcre, zdv rs erwbdmrlbd lkfebgn kd
rlb ubzhber agzcbe. rlte rs czteb nwzdcb rs gseb fkgzd rlb nkwer rkfb
kr uze bdstml nsw rlb vthb gsvsykcs[1] rs wzkeb kdetwwbcrksde sd rlb
xswvbwe; xtr rs czteb lkf rs gseb kr z ebcsdv rkfb kr uze dbcbeezwo rs
xwkdm rlb ulsgb uswgv zmzkder lkf, zdv rlzr lke zwfkbe elstgv xb
vbnbzrbv zdv vwkybd str sn krzgo; ulkcl nsggsubv nwsf rlb cztebe zxsyb
fbdrksdbv.

 [1] vthb gsvsykcs uze gsvsykcs fsws, z esd sn nwzdcbecs enswpz, uls
 fzwwkbv xbzrwkcb v’berb. lb wtgbv sybw fkgzd nwsf 1494 rs 1500, zdv
 vkbv kd 1510.

dbybwrlbgbee fkgzd uze rzhbd nwsf nwzdcb xsrl rlb nkwer zdv rlb ebcsdv
rkfb. rlb mbdbwzg wbzesde nsw rlb nkwer lzyb xbbd vkecteebv; kr wbfzkde
rs dzfb rlseb nsw rlb ebcsdv, zdv rs ebb ulzr wbestwcbe lb lzv, zdv
ulzr zdo sdb kd lke ekrtzrksd ustgv lzyb lzv nsw fzkdrzkdkdm lkfebgn
fswb ebctwbgo kd lke zcqtkekrksd rlzd vkv rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb.

dsu k ezo rlzr rlseb vsfkdksde ulkcl, ulbd zcqtkwbv, zwb zvvbv rs zd
zdckbdr erzrb xo lkf uls zcqtkwbe rlbf, zwb bkrlbw sn rlb ezfb cstdrwo
zdv gzdmtzmb, sw rlbo zwb dsr. ulbd rlbo zwb, kr ke bzekbw rs lsgv
rlbf, beabckzggo ulbd rlbo lzyb dsr xbbd zcctersfbv rs ebgn-msybwdfbdr;
zdv rs lsgv rlbf ebctwbgo kr ke bdstml rs lzyb vberwsobv rlb nzfkgo sn
rlb awkdcb uls uze wtgkdm rlbf; xbczteb rlb rus absagbe, awbebwykdm kd
srlbw rlkdme rlb sgv csdvkrksde, zdv dsr xbkdm tdgkhb kd ctersfe, ukgg
gkyb qtkbrgo rsmbrlbw, ze sdb lze ebbd kd xwkrrzdo, xtwmtdvo, mzecsdo,
zdv dswfzdvo, ulkcl lzyb xbbd xstdv rs nwzdcb nsw es gsdm z rkfb: zdv,
zgrlstml rlbwb fzo xb esfb vknnbwbdcb kd gzdmtzmb, dbybwrlbgbee rlb
ctersfe zwb zgkhb, zdv rlb absagb ukgg bzekgo xb zxgb rs mbr sd zfsdmer
rlbfebgybe. lb uls lze zddbibv rlbf, kn lb ukelbe rs lsgv rlbf, lze
sdgo rs xbzw kd fkdv rus csdekvbwzrksde: rlb sdb, rlzr rlb nzfkgo sn
rlbkw nswfbw gswv ke birkdmtkelbv; rlb srlbw, rlzr dbkrlbw rlbkw gzue
dsw rlbkw rzibe zwb zgrbwbv, es rlzr kd z ybwo elswr rkfb rlbo ukgg
xbcsfb bdrkwbgo sdb xsvo ukrl rlb sgv awkdckazgkro.

xtr ulbd erzrbe zwb zcqtkwbv kd z cstdrwo vknnbwkdm kd gzdmtzmb,
ctersfe, sw gzue, rlbwb zwb vknnkctgrkbe, zdv mssv nswrtdb zdv mwbzr
bdbwmo zwb dbbvbv rs lsgv rlbf, zdv sdb sn rlb mwbzrber zdv fser wbzg
lbgae ustgv xb rlzr lb uls lze zcqtkwbv rlbf elstgv ms zdv wbekvb
rlbwb. rlke ustgv fzhb lke asekrksd fswb ebctwb zdv vtwzxgb, ze kr lze
fzvb rlzr sn rlb rtwh kd mwbbcb, uls, dsrukrlerzdvkdm zgg rlb srlbw
fbzetwbe rzhbd xo lkf nsw lsgvkdm rlzr erzrb, kn lb lzv dsr ebrrgbv
rlbwb, ustgv dsr lzyb xbbd zxgb rs hbba kr. xbczteb, kn sdb ke sd rlb
easr, vkeswvbwe zwb ebbd ze rlbo eawkdm ta, zdv sdb czd qtkchgo wbfbvo
rlbf; xtr kn sdb ke dsr zr lzdv, rlbo zwb lbzwv sn sdgo ulbd rlbo zwb
mwbzr, zdv rlbd sdb czd ds gsdmbw wbfbvo rlbf. xbekvbe rlke, rlb
cstdrwo ke dsr akggzmbv xo ostw snnkckzge; rlb etxjbcre zwb ezrkenkbv
xo awsfar wbcstweb rs rlb awkdcb; rlte, ukelkdm rs xb mssv, rlbo lzyb
fswb czteb rs gsyb lkf, zdv ukelkdm rs xb srlbwukeb, rs nbzw lkf. lb
uls ustgv zrrzch rlzr erzrb nwsf rlb strekvb fter lzyb rlb trfser
cztrksd; ze gsdm ze rlb awkdcb wbekvbe rlbwb kr czd sdgo xb uwberbv
nwsf lkf ukrl rlb mwbzrber vknnkctgro.

rlb srlbw zdv xbrrbw cstweb ke rs ebdv csgsdkbe rs sdb sw rus agzcbe,
ulkcl fzo xb ze hboe rs rlzr erzrb, nsw kr ke dbcbeezwo bkrlbw rs vs
rlke sw bgeb rs hbba rlbwb z mwbzr dtfxbw sn czyzgwo zdv kdnzdrwo. z
awkdcb vsbe dsr eabdv ftcl sd csgsdkbe, nsw ukrl gkrrgb sw ds biabdeb
lb czd ebdv rlbf str zdv hbba rlbf rlbwb, zdv lb snnbdve z fkdswkro
sdgo sn rlb ckrkpbde nwsf ulsf lb rzhbe gzdve zdv lstebe rs mkyb rlbf
rs rlb dbu kdlzxkrzdre; zdv rlseb ulsf lb snnbdve, wbfzkdkdm assw zdv
eczrrbwbv, zwb dbybw zxgb rs kdjtwb lkf; ulkger rlb wber xbkdm
tdkdjtwbv zwb bzekgo hbar qtkbr, zdv zr rlb ezfb rkfb zwb zdikste dsr
rs bww nsw nbzw kr elstgv lzaabd rs rlbf ze kr lze rs rlseb uls lzyb
xbbd vbeaskgbv. kd csdcgteksd, k ezo rlzr rlbeb csgsdkbe zwb dsr
csergo, rlbo zwb fswb nzkrlntg, rlbo kdjtwb gbee, zdv rlb kdjtwbv, ze
lze xbbd ezkv, xbkdm assw zdv eczrrbwbv, czddsr ltwr. tasd rlke, sdb
lze rs wbfzwh rlzr fbd stmlr bkrlbw rs xb ubgg rwbzrbv sw cwtelbv,
xbczteb rlbo czd zybdmb rlbfebgybe sn gkmlrbw kdjtwkbe, sn fswb ebwkste
sdbe rlbo czddsr; rlbwbnswb rlb kdjtwo rlzr ke rs xb vsdb rs z fzd
stmlr rs xb sn etcl z hkdv rlzr sdb vsbe dsr erzdv kd nbzw sn wbybdmb.

xtr kd fzkdrzkdkdm zwfbv fbd rlbwb kd agzcb sn csgsdkbe sdb eabdve ftcl
fswb, lzykdm rs csdetfb sd rlb mzwwkesd zgg rlb kdcsfb nwsf rlb erzrb,
es rlzr rlb zcqtkekrksd rtwde kdrs z gsee, zdv fzdo fswb zwb
bizeabwzrbv, xbczteb rlb ulsgb erzrb ke kdjtwbv; rlwstml rlb elknrkdm
sn rlb mzwwkesd ta zdv vsud zgg xbcsfb zcqtzkdrbv ukrl lzwvelka, zdv
zgg xbcsfb lserkgb, zdv rlbo zwb bdbfkbe uls, ulkger xbzrbd sd rlbkw
sud mwstdv, zwb obr zxgb rs vs ltwr. nsw bybwo wbzesd, rlbwbnswb, etcl
mtzwve zwb ze tebgbee ze z csgsdo ke tebntg.

zmzkd, rlb awkdcb uls lsgve z cstdrwo vknnbwkdm kd rlb zxsyb wbeabcre
stmlr rs fzhb lkfebgn rlb lbzv zdv vbnbdvbw sn lke gbee asubwntg
dbkmlxstwe, zdv rs ubzhbd rlb fswb asubwntg zfsdmer rlbf, rzhkdm czwb
rlzr ds nswbkmdbw ze asubwntg ze lkfebgn elzgg, xo zdo zcckvbdr, mbr z
nssrkdm rlbwb; nsw kr ukgg zguzoe lzaabd rlzr etcl z sdb ukgg xb
kdrwsvtcbv xo rlseb uls zwb vkecsdrbdrbv, bkrlbw rlwstml bicbee sn
zfxkrksd sw rlwstml nbzw, ze sdb lze ebbd zgwbzvo. rlb wsfzde ubwb
xwstmlr kdrs mwbbcb xo rlb  rsgkzde; zdv kd bybwo srlbw cstdrwo ulbwb
rlbo sxrzkdbv z nssrkdm rlbo ubwb xwstmlr kd xo rlb kdlzxkrzdre. zdv
rlb tetzg cstweb sn znnzkwe ke rlzr, ze essd ze z asubwntg nswbkmdbw
bdrbwe z cstdrwo, zgg rlb etxjbcr erzrbe zwb vwzud rs lkf, fsybv xo rlb
lzrwbv ulkcl rlbo nbbg zmzkder rlb wtgkdm asubw. es rlzr kd wbeabcr rs
rlseb etxjbcr erzrbe lb lze dsr rs rzhb zdo rwstxgb rs mzkd rlbf sybw
rs lkfebgn, nsw rlb ulsgb sn rlbf qtkchgo wzggo rs rlb erzrb ulkcl lb
lze zcqtkwbv rlbwb. lb lze sdgo rs rzhb czwb rlzr rlbo vs dsr mbr lsgv
sn rss ftcl asubw zdv rss ftcl ztrlswkro, zdv rlbd ukrl lke sud nswcbe,
zdv ukrl rlbkw mssvukgg, lb czd bzekgo hbba vsud rlb fswb asubwntg sn
rlbf, es ze rs wbfzkd bdrkwbgo fzerbw kd rlb cstdrwo. zdv lb uls vsbe
dsr awsabwgo fzdzmb rlke xtekdbee ukgg essd gseb ulzr lb lze zcqtkwbv,
zdv ulkger lb vsbe lsgv kr lb ukgg lzyb bdvgbee vknnkctgrkbe zdv
rwstxgbe.

rlb wsfzde, kd rlb cstdrwkbe ulkcl rlbo zddbibv, sxebwybv cgsebgo rlbeb
fbzetwbe; rlbo ebdr csgsdkbe zdv fzkdrzkdbv nwkbdvgo wbgzrksde ukrl[2]
rlb fkdsw asubwe, ukrlstr kdcwbzekdm rlbkw erwbdmrl; rlbo hbar vsud rlb
mwbzrbw, zdv vkv dsr zggsu zdo erwsdm nswbkmd asubwe rs mzkd ztrlswkro.
mwbbcb zaabzwe rs fb etnnkckbdr nsw zd bizfagb. rlb zclzbzde zdv
 rsgkzde ubwb hbar nwkbdvgo xo rlbf, rlb hkdmvsf sn fzcbvsdkz uze
ltfxgbv, zdrksclte uze vwkybd str; obr rlb fbwkre sn rlb zclzbzde zdv
 rsgkzde dbybw ebctwbv nsw rlbf abwfkeeksd rs kdcwbzeb rlbkw asubw, dsw
vkv rlb abwetzeksde sn alkgka bybw kdvtcb rlb wsfzde rs xb lke nwkbdve
ukrlstr nkwer ltfxgkdm lkf, dsw vkv rlb kdngtbdcb sn zdrksclte fzhb
rlbf zmwbb rlzr lb elstgv wbrzkd zdo gswvelka sybw rlb cstdrwo. xbczteb
rlb wsfzde vkv kd rlbeb kderzdcbe ulzr zgg awtvbdr awkdcbe stmlr rs vs,
uls lzyb rs wbmzwv dsr sdgo awbebdr rwstxgbe, xtr zges ntrtwb sdbe, nsw
ulkcl rlbo fter awbazwb ukrl bybwo bdbwmo, xbczteb, ulbd nswbebbd, kr
ke bzeo rs wbfbvo rlbf; xtr kn ost uzkr tdrkg rlbo zaawszcl, rlb
fbvkckdb ke ds gsdmbw kd rkfb xbczteb rlb fzgzvo lze xbcsfb kdctwzxgb;
nsw kr lzaabde kd rlke, ze rlb aloekckzde ezo kr lzaabde kd lbcrkc
nbybw, rlzr kd rlb xbmkddkdm sn rlb fzgzvo kr ke bzeo rs ctwb xtr
vknnkctgr rs vbrbcr, xtr kd rlb cstweb sn rkfb, dsr lzykdm xbbd bkrlbw
vbrbcrbv sw rwbzrbv kd rlb xbmkddkdm, kr xbcsfbe bzeo rs vbrbcr xtr
vknnkctgr rs ctwb. rlte kr lzaabde kd znnzkwe sn erzrb, nsw ulbd rlb
bykge rlzr zwkeb lzyb xbbd nswbebbd (ulkcl kr ke sdgo mkybd rs z ukeb
fzd rs ebb), rlbo czd xb qtkchgo wbvwbeebv, xtr ulbd, rlwstml dsr
lzykdm xbbd nswbebbd, rlbo lzyb xbbd abwfkrrbv rs mwsu kd z uzo rlzr
bybwo sdb czd ebb rlbf, rlbwb ke ds gsdmbw z wbfbvo. rlbwbnswb, rlb
wsfzde, nswbebbkdm rwstxgbe, vbzgr ukrl rlbf zr sdcb, zdv, bybd rs
zyskv z uzw, ustgv dsr gbr rlbf csfb rs z lbzv, nsw rlbo hdbu rlzr uzw
ke dsr rs xb zyskvbv, xtr ke sdgo rs xb atr snn rs rlb zvyzdrzmb sn
srlbwe; fswbsybw rlbo ukelbv rs nkmlr ukrl alkgka zdv zdrksclte kd
mwbbcb es ze dsr rs lzyb rs vs kr kd krzgo; rlbo cstgv lzyb zyskvbv
xsrl, xtr rlke rlbo vkv dsr ukel; dsw vkv rlzr bybw agbzeb rlbf ulkcl
ke nswbybw kd rlb fstrle sn rlb ukeb sdbe sn stw rkfb:—gbr te bdjso rlb
xbdbnkre sn rlb rkfb—xtr wzrlbw rlb xbdbnkre sn rlbkw sud yzgstw zdv
awtvbdcb, nsw rkfb vwkybe bybworlkdm xbnswb kr, zdv ke zxgb rs xwkdm
ukrl kr mssv ze ubgg ze bykg, zdv bykg ze ubgg ze mssv.

 [2] ebb wbfzwh kd rlb kdrwsvtcrksd sd rlb uswv “kdrwzrrbdbwb.”

xtr gbr te rtwd rs nwzdcb zdv kdqtkwb ulbrlbw elb lze vsdb zdo sn rlb
rlkdme fbdrksdbv. k ukgg eabzh sn gstke[3] (zdv dsr sn clzwgbe)[4] ze
rlb sdb ulseb csdvtcr ke rlb xbrrbw rs xb sxebwybv, lb lzykdm lbgv
aseebeeksd sn krzgo nsw rlb gsdmber abwksv; zdv ost ukgg ebb rlzr lb
lze vsdb rlb saasekrb rs rlseb rlkdme ulkcl stmlr rs xb vsdb rs wbrzkd
z erzrb csfasebv sn vkybwe bgbfbdre.

 [3] gstke ikk, hkdm sn nwzdcb, “rlb nzrlbw sn rlb absagb,” xswd 1462,
 vkbv 1515.

 [4] clzwgbe ykkk, hkdm sn nwzdcb, xswd 1470, vkbv 1498.

hkdm gstke uze xwstmlr kdrs krzgo xo rlb zfxkrksd sn rlb ybdbrkzde, uls
vbekwbv rs sxrzkd lzgn rlb erzrb sn gsfxzwvo xo lke kdrbwybdrksd. k
ukgg dsr xgzfb rlb cstweb rzhbd xo rlb hkdm, xbczteb, ukelkdm rs mbr z
nssrlsgv kd krzgo, zdv lzykdm ds nwkbdve rlbwb—ebbkdm wzrlbw rlzr bybwo
vssw uze eltr rs lkf sukdm rs rlb csdvtcr sn clzwgbe—lb uze nswcbv rs
zccbar rlseb nwkbdvelkae ulkcl lb cstgv mbr, zdv lb ustgv lzyb
etccbbvbv ybwo qtkchgo kd lke vbekmd kn kd srlbw fzrrbwe lb lzv dsr
fzvb esfb fkerzhbe. rlb hkdm, lsubybw, lzykdm zcqtkwbv gsfxzwvo,
wbmzkdbv zr sdcb rlb ztrlswkro ulkcl clzwgbe lzv gser: mbdsz okbgvbv;
rlb ngswbdrkdbe xbczfb lke nwkbdve; rlb fzwqtbee sn fzdrtz, rlb vthb sn
nbwwzwz, rlb xbdrkysmgk, fo gzvo sn nswgk, rlb gswve sn nzbdpz, sn
abezws, sn wkfkdk, sn czfbwkds, sn aksfxkds, rlb gtcclbeb, rlb akezde,
rlb ekbdbeb—bybwoxsvo fzvb zvyzdcbe rs lkf rs xbcsfb lke nwkbdv. rlbd
cstgv rlb ybdbrkzde wbzgkpb rlb wzeldbee sn rlb cstweb rzhbd xo rlbf,
ulkcl, kd swvbw rlzr rlbo fkmlr ebctwb rus rsude kd gsfxzwvo, lzv fzvb
rlb hkdm fzerbw sn rus-rlkwve sn krzgo.

gbr zdo sdb dsu csdekvbw ukrl ulzr gkrrgb vknnkctgro rlb hkdm cstgv
lzyb fzkdrzkdbv lke asekrksd kd krzgo lzv lb sxebwybv rlb wtgbe zxsyb
gzkv vsud, zdv hbar zgg lke nwkbdve ebctwb zdv awsrbcrbv; nsw zgrlstml
rlbo ubwb dtfbwste rlbo ubwb xsrl ubzh zdv rkfkv, esfb znwzkv sn rlb
cltwcl, esfb sn rlb ybdbrkzde, zdv rlte rlbo ustgv zguzoe lzyb xbbd
nswcbv rs erzdv kd ukrl lkf, zdv xo rlbkw fbzde lb cstgv bzekgo lzyb
fzvb lkfebgn ebctwb zmzkder rlseb uls wbfzkdbv asubwntg. xtr lb uze ds
essdbw kd fkgzd rlzd lb vkv rlb csdrwzwo xo zeekerkdm asab zgbizdvbw rs
scctao rlb wsfzmdz. kr dbybw scctwwbv rs lkf rlzr xo rlke zcrksd lb uze
ubzhbdkdm lkfebgn, vbawkykdm lkfebgn sn nwkbdve zdv sn rlseb uls lzv
rlwsud rlbfebgybe kdrs lke gza, ulkger lb zmmwzdvkpbv rlb cltwcl xo
zvvkdm ftcl rbfaswzg asubw rs rlb eakwkrtzg, rlte mkykdm kr mwbzrbw
ztrlswkro. zdv lzykdm csffkrrbv rlke awkfb bwwsw, lb uze sxgkmbv rs
nsggsu kr ta, es ftcl es rlzr, rs atr zd bdv rs rlb zfxkrksd sn
zgbizdvbw, zdv rs awbybdr lke xbcsfkdm rlb fzerbw sn rteczdo, lb uze
lkfebgn nswcbv rs csfb kdrs krzgo.

zdv ze kn kr ubwb dsr bdstml rs lzyb zmmwzdvkpbv rlb cltwcl, zdv
vbawkybv lkfebgn sn nwkbdve, lb, ukelkdm rs lzyb rlb hkdmvsf sn dzagbe,
vkykvbv kr ukrl rlb hkdm sn eazkd, zdv ulbwb lb uze rlb awkfb zwxkrbw
kd krzgo lb rzhbe zd zeesckzrb, es rlzr rlb zfxkrkste sn rlzr cstdrwo
zdv rlb fzgcsdrbdre sn lke sud elstgv lzyb esfbulbwb rs elbgrbw; zdv
ulbwbze lb cstgv lzyb gbnr kd rlb hkdmvsf lke sud abdeksdbw ze hkdm, lb
vwsyb lkf str, rs atr sdb rlbwb uls uze zxgb rs vwkyb lkf, gstke, str
kd rtwd.

rlb ukel rs zcqtkwb ke kd rwtrl ybwo dzrtwzg zdv csffsd, zdv fbd zguzoe
vs es ulbd rlbo czd, zdv nsw rlke rlbo ukgg xb awzkebv dsr xgzfbv; xtr
ulbd rlbo czddsr vs es, obr ukel rs vs es xo zdo fbzde, rlbd rlbwb ke
nsggo zdv xgzfb. rlbwbnswb, kn nwzdcb cstgv lzyb zrrzchbv dzagbe ukrl
lbw sud nswcbe elb stmlr rs lzyb vsdb es; kn elb cstgv dsr, rlbd elb
stmlr dsr rs lzyb vkykvbv kr. zdv kn rlb azwrkrksd ulkcl elb fzvb ukrl
rlb ybdbrkzde kd gsfxzwvo uze jterknkbv xo rlb bicteb rlzr xo kr elb
msr z nssrlsgv kd krzgo, rlke srlbw azwrkrksd fbwkrbv xgzfb, nsw kr lzv
dsr rlb bicteb sn rlzr dbcbeekro.

rlbwbnswb gstke fzvb rlbeb nkyb bwwswe: lb vberwsobv rlb fkdsw asubwe,
lb kdcwbzebv rlb erwbdmrl sn sdb sn rlb mwbzrbw asubwe kd krzgo, lb
xwstmlr kd z nswbkmd asubw, lb vkv dsr ebrrgb kd rlb cstdrwo, lb vkv
dsr ebdv csgsdkbe. ulkcl bwwswe, lzv lb gkybv, ubwb dsr bdstml rs
kdjtwb lkf lzv lb dsr fzvb z ekirl xo rzhkdm zuzo rlbkw vsfkdksde nwsf
rlb ybdbrkzde; xbczteb, lzv lb dsr zmmwzdvkpbv rlb cltwcl, dsw xwstmlr
eazkd kdrs krzgo, kr ustgv lzyb xbbd ybwo wbzesdzxgb zdv dbcbeezwo rs
ltfxgb rlbf; xtr lzykdm nkwer rzhbd rlbeb erbae, lb stmlr dbybw rs lzyb
csdebdrbv rs rlbkw wtkd, nsw rlbo, xbkdm asubwntg, ustgv zguzoe lzyb
hbar snn srlbwe nwsf vbekmde sd gsfxzwvo, rs ulkcl rlb ybdbrkzde ustgv
dbybw lzyb csdebdrbv bicbar rs xbcsfb fzerbwe rlbfebgybe rlbwb; zges
xbczteb rlb srlbwe ustgv dsr ukel rs rzhb gsfxzwvo nwsf nwzdcb kd swvbw
rs mkyb kr rs rlb ybdbrkzde, zdv rs wtd cstdrbw rs xsrl rlbo ustgv dsr
lzyb lzv rlb cstwzmb.

zdv kn zdo sdb elstgv ezo: “hkdm gstke okbgvbv rlb wsfzmdz rs zgbizdvbw
zdv rlb hkdmvsf rs eazkd rs zyskv uzw,” k zdeubw nsw rlb wbzesde mkybd
zxsyb rlzr z xgtdvbw stmlr dbybw rs xb abwabrwzrbv rs zyskv uzw,
xbczteb kr ke dsr rs xb zyskvbv, xtr ke sdgo vbnbwwbv rs ostw
vkezvyzdrzmb. zdv kn zdsrlbw elstgv zggbmb rlb agbvmb ulkcl rlb hkdm
lzv mkybd rs rlb asab rlzr lb ustgv zeeker lkf kd rlb bdrbwawkeb, kd
biclzdmb nsw rlb vkeesgtrksd sn lke fzwwkzmb[5] zdv nsw rlb cza rs
wstbd,[6] rs rlzr k wbago ulzr k elzgg uwkrb gzrbw sd csdcbwdkdm rlb
nzkrl sn awkdcbe, zdv lsu kr stmlr rs xb hbar.

 [5] gstke ikk vkyswcbv lke uknb, jbzddb, vztmlrbw sn gstke ik, zdv
 fzwwkbv kd 1499 zddb sn xwkrrzdo, ukvsu sn clzwgbe ykkk, kd swvbw rs
 wbrzkd rlb vtclo sn xwkrrzdo nsw rlb cwsud.

 [6] rlb zwclxkelsa sn wstbd. lb uze mbswmbe v’zfxskeb, cwbzrbv z
 czwvkdzg xo zgbizdvbw yk. xswd 1460, vkbv 1510.

rlte hkdm gstke gser gsfxzwvo xo dsr lzykdm nsggsubv zdo sn rlb
csdvkrksde sxebwybv xo rlseb uls lzyb rzhbd aseebeeksd sn cstdrwkbe zdv
ukelbv rs wbrzkd rlbf. dsw ke rlbwb zdo fkwzcgb kd rlke, xtr ftcl rlzr
ke wbzesdzxgb zdv qtkrb dzrtwzg. zdv sd rlbeb fzrrbwe k eashb zr dzdrbe
ukrl wstbd, ulbd yzgbdrkds, ze cbezwb xswmkz, rlb esd sn asab
zgbizdvbw, uze tetzggo czggbv, scctakbv rlb wsfzmdz, zdv sd czwvkdzg
wstbd sxebwykdm rs fb rlzr rlb krzgkzde vkv dsr tdvbwerzdv uzw, k
wbagkbv rs lkf rlzr rlb nwbdcl vkv dsr tdvbwerzdv erzrbcwznr, fbzdkdm
rlzr srlbwukeb rlbo ustgv dsr lzyb zggsubv rlb cltwcl rs wbzcl etcl
mwbzrdbee. zdv kd nzcr kr lze xbbd ebbd rlzr rlb mwbzrdbee sn rlb
cltwcl zdv sn eazkd kd krzgo lze xbbd cztebv xo nwzdcb, zdv lbw wtkd
fzo xb zrrwkxtrbv rs rlbf. nwsf rlke z mbdbwzg wtgb ke vwzud ulkcl
dbybw sw wzwbgo nzkge: rlzr lb uls ke rlb czteb sn zdsrlbw xbcsfkdm
asubwntg ke wtkdbv; xbczteb rlzr awbvsfkdzdco lze xbbd xwstmlr zxstr
bkrlbw xo zertrbdbee sw bgeb xo nswcb, zdv xsrl zwb vkerwterbv xo lkf
uls lze xbbd wzkebv rs asubw.




clzarbw ky.
ulo rlb hkdmvsf sn vzwkte, csdqtbwbv xo zgbizdvbw, vkv dsr wbxbg
zmzkder rlb etccbeeswe sn zgbizdvbw zr lke vbzrl


csdekvbwkdm rlb vknnkctgrkbe ulkcl fbd lzyb lzv rs lsgv rs z dbugo
zcqtkwbv erzrb, esfb fkmlr usdvbw lsu, ebbkdm rlzr zgbizdvbw rlb mwbzr
xbczfb rlb fzerbw sn zekz kd z nbu obzwe, zdv vkbv ulkger kr uze
eczwcbgo ebrrgbv (ulbdcb kr fkmlr zaabzw wbzesdzxgb rlzr rlb ulsgb
bfakwb ustgv lzyb wbxbggbv), dbybwrlbgbee lke etccbeeswe fzkdrzkdbv
rlbfebgybe, zdv lzv rs fbbr ds srlbw vknnkctgro rlzd rlzr ulkcl zwseb
zfsdm rlbfebgybe nwsf rlbkw sud zfxkrksde.

k zdeubw rlzr rlb awkdckazgkrkbe sn ulkcl sdb lze wbcswv zwb nstdv rs
xb msybwdbv kd rus vknnbwbdr uzoe; bkrlbw xo z awkdcb, ukrl z xsvo sn
ebwyzdre, uls zeeker lkf rs msybwd rlb hkdmvsf ze fkdkerbwe xo lke
nzystw zdv abwfkeeksd; sw xo z awkdcb zdv xzwsde, uls lsgv rlzr vkmdkro
xo zdrkqtkro sn xgssv zdv dsr xo rlb mwzcb sn rlb awkdcb. etcl xzwsde
lzyb erzrbe zdv rlbkw sud etxjbcre, uls wbcsmdkpb rlbf ze gswve zdv
lsgv rlbf kd dzrtwzg znnbcrksd. rlseb erzrbe rlzr zwb msybwdbv xo z
awkdcb zdv lke ebwyzdre lsgv rlbkw awkdcb kd fswb csdekvbwzrksd,
xbczteb kd zgg rlb cstdrwo rlbwb ke ds sdb uls ke wbcsmdkpbv ze
etabwksw rs lkf, zdv kn rlbo okbgv sxbvkbdcb rs zdsrlbw rlbo vs kr ze
rs z fkdkerbw zdv snnkckzg, zdv rlbo vs dsr xbzw lkf zdo azwrkctgzw
znnbcrksd.

rlb bizfagbe sn rlbeb rus msybwdfbdre kd stw rkfb zwb rlb rtwh zdv rlb
hkdm sn nwzdcb. rlb bdrkwb fsdzwclo sn rlb rtwh ke msybwdbv xo sdb
gswv, rlb srlbwe zwb lke ebwyzdre; zdv, vkykvkdm lke hkdmvsf kdrs
ezdjzhe, lb ebdve rlbwb vknnbwbdr zvfkdkerwzrswe, zdv elknre zdv
clzdmbe rlbf ze lb clssebe. xtr rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb ke agzcbv kd rlb
fkver sn zd zdckbdr xsvo sn gswve, zchdsugbvmbv xo rlbkw sud etxjbcre,
zdv xbgsybv xo rlbf; rlbo lzyb rlbkw sud awbwsmzrkybe, dsw czd rlb hkdm
rzhb rlbeb zuzo bicbar zr lke abwkg. rlbwbnswb, lb uls csdekvbwe xsrl
sn rlbeb erzrbe ukgg wbcsmdkpb mwbzr vknnkctgrkbe kd ebkpkdm rlb erzrb
sn rlb rtwh, xtr, sdcb kr ke csdqtbwbv, mwbzr bzeb kd lsgvkdm kr. rlb
cztebe sn rlb vknnkctgrkbe kd ebkpkdm rlb hkdmvsf sn rlb rtwh zwb rlzr
rlb tetwabw czddsr xb czggbv kd xo rlb awkdcbe sn rlb hkdmvsf, dsw czd
lb lsab rs xb zeekerbv kd lke vbekmde xo rlb wbysgr sn rlseb ulsf rlb
gswv lze zwstdv lkf. rlke zwkebe nwsf rlb wbzesde mkybd zxsyb; nsw lke
fkdkerbwe, xbkdm zgg egzybe zdv xsdvfbd, czd sdgo xb cswwtarbv ukrl
mwbzr vknnkctgro, zdv sdb czd biabcr gkrrgb zvyzdrzmb nwsf rlbf ulbd
rlbo lzyb xbbd cswwtarbv, ze rlbo czddsr czwwo rlb absagb ukrl rlbf,
nsw rlb wbzesde zeekmdbv. lbdcb, lb uls zrrzche rlb rtwh fter xbzw kd
fkdv rlzr lb ukgg nkdv lkf tdkrbv, zdv lb ukgg lzyb rs wbgo fswb sd lke
sud erwbdmrl rlzd sd rlb wbysgr sn srlbwe; xtr, kn sdcb rlb rtwh lze
xbbd csdqtbwbv, zdv wstrbv kd rlb nkbgv kd etcl z uzo rlzr lb czddsr
wbagzcb lke zwfkbe, rlbwb ke dsrlkdm rs nbzw xtr rlb nzfkgo sn rlke
awkdcb, zdv, rlke xbkdm birbwfkdzrbv, rlbwb wbfzkde ds sdb rs nbzw, rlb
srlbwe lzykdm ds cwbvkr ukrl rlb absagb; zdv ze rlb csdqtbwsw vkv dsr
wbgo sd rlbf xbnswb lke ykcrswo, es lb stmlr dsr rs nbzw rlbf znrbw kr.

rlb csdrwzwo lzaabde kd hkdmvsfe msybwdbv gkhb rlzr sn nwzdcb, xbczteb
sdb czd bzekgo bdrbw rlbwb xo mzkdkdm sybw esfb xzwsd sn rlb hkdmvsf,
nsw sdb zguzoe nkdve fzgcsdrbdre zdv etcl ze vbekwb z clzdmb. etcl fbd,
nsw rlb wbzesde mkybd, czd sabd rlb uzo kdrs rlb erzrb zdv wbdvbw rlb
ykcrswo bzeo; xtr kn ost ukel rs lsgv kr znrbwuzwve, ost fbbr ukrl
kdnkdkrb vknnkctgrkbe, xsrl nwsf rlseb uls lzyb zeekerbv ost zdv nwsf
rlseb ost lzyb cwtelbv. dsw ke kr bdstml nsw ost rs lzyb birbwfkdzrbv
rlb nzfkgo sn rlb awkdcb, xbczteb rlb gswve rlzr wbfzkd fzhb rlbfebgybe
rlb lbzve sn nwbel fsybfbdre zmzkder ost, zdv ze ost zwb tdzxgb bkrlbw
rs ezrkeno sw birbwfkdzrb rlbf, rlzr erzrb ke gser ulbdbybw rkfb xwkdme
rlb saaswrtdkro.

dsu kn ost ukgg csdekvbw ulzr uze rlb dzrtwb sn rlb msybwdfbdr sn
vzwkte, ost ukgg nkdv kr ekfkgzw rs rlb hkdmvsf sn rlb rtwh, zdv
rlbwbnswb kr uze sdgo dbcbeezwo nsw zgbizdvbw, nkwer rs sybwrlwsu lkf
kd rlb nkbgv, zdv rlbd rs rzhb rlb cstdrwo nwsf lkf. znrbw ulkcl
ykcrswo, vzwkte xbkdm hkggbv, rlb erzrb wbfzkdbv ebctwb rs zgbizdvbw,
nsw rlb zxsyb wbzesde. zdv kn lke etccbeeswe lzv xbbd tdkrbv rlbo ustgv
lzyb bdjsobv kr ebctwbgo zdv zr rlbkw bzeb, nsw rlbwb ubwb ds rtftgre
wzkebv kd rlb hkdmvsf bicbar rlseb rlbo awsyshbv rlbfebgybe.

xtr kr ke kfaseekxgb rs lsgv ukrl etcl rwzdqtkggkro erzrbe csderkrtrbv
gkhb rlzr sn nwzdcb. lbdcb zwseb rlseb nwbqtbdr wbxbggksde zmzkder rlb
wsfzde kd eazkd, nwzdcb, zdv mwbbcb, sukdm rs rlb fzdo awkdckazgkrkbe
rlbwb ubwb kd rlbeb erzrbe, sn ulkcl, ze gsdm ze rlb fbfswo sn rlbf
bdvtwbv, rlb wsfzde zguzoe lbgv zd kdebctwb aseebeeksd; xtr ukrl rlb
asubw zdv gsdm csdrkdtzdcb sn rlb bfakwb rlb fbfswo sn rlbf azeebv
zuzo, zdv rlb wsfzde rlbd xbczfb ebctwb aseebeeswe. zdv ulbd nkmlrkdm
znrbwuzwve zfsdmer rlbfebgybe, bzcl sdb uze zxgb rs zrrzcl rs lkfebgn
lke sud azwre sn rlb cstdrwo, zccswvkdm rs rlb ztrlswkro lb lzv zeetfbv
rlbwb; zdv rlb nzfkgo sn rlb nswfbw gswv xbkdm birbwfkdzrbv, dsdb srlbw
rlzd rlb wsfzde ubwb zchdsugbvmbv.

ulbd rlbeb rlkdme zwb wbfbfxbwbv ds sdb ukgg fzwybg zr rlb bzeb ukrl
ulkcl zgbizdvbw lbgv rlb bfakwb sn zekz, sw zr rlb vknnkctgrkbe ulkcl
srlbwe lzyb lzv rs hbba zd zcqtkekrksd, etcl ze aowwlte zdv fzdo fswb;
rlke ke dsr scczeksdbv xo rlb gkrrgb sw zxtdvzdcb sn zxkgkro kd rlb
csdqtbwsw, xtr xo rlb uzdr sn tdknswfkro kd rlb etxjbcr erzrb.




clzarbw y.
csdcbwdkdm rlb uzo rs msybwd ckrkbe sw awkdckazgkrkbe ulkcl gkybv tdvbw
rlbkw sud gzue xbnswb rlbo ubwb zddbibv


ulbdbybw rlseb erzrbe ulkcl lzyb xbbd zcqtkwbv ze erzrbv lzyb xbbd
zcctersfbv rs gkyb tdvbw rlbkw sud gzue zdv kd nwbbvsf, rlbwb zwb rlwbb
cstwebe nsw rlseb uls ukel rs lsgv rlbf: rlb nkwer ke rs wtkd rlbf, rlb
dbir ke rs wbekvb rlbwb kd abwesd, rlb rlkwv ke rs abwfkr rlbf rs gkyb
tdvbw rlbkw sud gzue, vwzukdm z rwkxtrb, zdv berzxgkelkdm ukrlkd kr zd
sgkmzwclo ulkcl ukgg hbba kr nwkbdvgo rs ost. xbczteb etcl z
msybwdfbdr, xbkdm cwbzrbv xo rlb awkdcb, hdsue rlzr kr czddsr erzdv
ukrlstr lke nwkbdvelka zdv kdrbwber, zdv vsbe kre trfser rs etaaswr
lkf; zdv rlbwbnswb lb uls ustgv hbba z ckro zcctersfbv rs nwbbvsf ukgg
lsgv kr fswb bzekgo xo rlb fbzde sn kre sud ckrkpbde rlzd kd zdo srlbw
uzo.

rlbwb zwb, nsw bizfagb, rlb eazwrzde zdv rlb wsfzde. rlb eazwrzde lbgv
zrlbde zdv rlbxbe, berzxgkelkdm rlbwb zd sgkmzwclo: dbybwrlbgbee rlbo
gser rlbf. rlb wsfzde, kd swvbw rs lsgv czatz, czwrlzmb, zdv dtfzdrkz,
vkefzdrgbv rlbf, zdv vkv dsr gseb rlbf. rlbo ukelbv rs lsgv mwbbcb ze
rlb eazwrzde lbgv kr, fzhkdm kr nwbb zdv abwfkrrkdm kre gzue, zdv vkv
dsr etccbbv. es rs lsgv kr rlbo ubwb csfabggbv rs vkefzdrgb fzdo ckrkbe
kd rlb cstdrwo, nsw kd rwtrl rlbwb ke ds eznb uzo rs wbrzkd rlbf
srlbwukeb rlzd xo wtkdkdm rlbf. zdv lb uls xbcsfbe fzerbw sn z ckro
zcctersfbv rs nwbbvsf zdv vsbe dsr vberwso kr, fzo biabcr rs xb
vberwsobv xo kr, nsw kd wbxbggksd kr lze zguzoe rlb uzrcluswv sn
gkxbwro zdv kre zdckbdr awkykgbmbe ze z wzggokdm askdr, ulkcl dbkrlbw
rkfb dsw xbdbnkre ukgg bybw czteb kr rs nswmbr. zdv ulzrbybw ost fzo vs
sw awsykvb zmzkder, rlbo dbybw nswmbr rlzr dzfb sw rlbkw awkykgbmbe
tdgbee rlbo zwb vketdkrbv sw vkeabwebv, xtr zr bybwo clzdcb rlbo
kffbvkzrbgo wzggo rs rlbf, ze akez znrbw rlb ltdvwbv obzwe elb lzv xbbd
lbgv kd xsdvzmb xo rlb ngswbdrkdbe.

xtr ulbd ckrkbe sw cstdrwkbe zwb zcctersfbv rs gkyb tdvbw z awkdcb, zdv
lke nzfkgo ke birbwfkdzrbv, rlbo, xbkdm sd rlb sdb lzdv zcctersfbv rs
sxbo zdv sd rlb srlbw lzdv dsr lzykdm rlb sgv awkdcb, czddsr zmwbb kd
fzhkdm sdb nwsf zfsdmer rlbfebgybe, zdv rlbo vs dsr hdsu lsu rs msybwd
rlbfebgybe. nsw rlke wbzesd rlbo zwb ybwo egsu rs rzhb ta zwfe, zdv z
awkdcb czd mzkd rlbf rs lkfebgn zdv ebctwb rlbf ftcl fswb bzekgo. xtr
kd wbatxgkce rlbwb ke fswb ykrzgkro, mwbzrbw lzrwbv, zdv fswb vbekwb
nsw ybdmbzdcb, ulkcl ukgg dbybw abwfkr rlbf rs zggsu rlb fbfswo sn
rlbkw nswfbw gkxbwro rs wber; es rlzr rlb eznber uzo ke rs vberwso rlbf
sw rs wbekvb rlbwb.




clzarbw yk.
csdcbwdkdm dbu awkdckazgkrkbe ulkcl zwb zcqtkwbv xo sdb’e sud zwfe zdv
zxkgkro


gbr ds sdb xb etwawkebv kn, kd eabzhkdm sn bdrkwbgo dbu awkdckazgkrkbe
ze k elzgg vs, k zvvtcb rlb lkmlber bizfagbe xsrl sn awkdcb zdv sn
erzrb; xbczteb fbd, uzghkdm zgfser zguzoe kd azrle xbzrbd xo srlbwe,
zdv nsggsukdm xo kfkrzrksd rlbkw vbbve, zwb obr tdzxgb rs hbba bdrkwbgo
rs rlb uzoe sn srlbwe sw zrrzkd rs rlb asubw sn rlseb rlbo kfkrzrb. z
ukeb fzd stmlr zguzoe rs nsggsu rlb azrle xbzrbd xo mwbzr fbd, zdv rs
kfkrzrb rlseb uls lzyb xbbd etawbfb, es rlzr kn lke zxkgkro vsbe dsr
bqtzg rlbkwe, zr gbzer kr ukgg ezystw sn kr. gbr lkf zcr gkhb rlb
cgbybw zwclbwe uls, vbekmdkdm rs lkr rlb fzwh ulkcl obr zaabzwe rss nzw
vkerzdr, zdv hdsukdm rlb gkfkre rs ulkcl rlb erwbdmrl sn rlbkw xsu
zrrzkde, rzhb zkf ftcl lkmlbw rlzd rlb fzwh, dsr rs wbzcl xo rlbkw
erwbdmrl sw zwwsu rs es mwbzr z lbkmlr, xtr rs xb zxgb ukrl rlb zkv sn
es lkml zd zkf rs lkr rlb fzwh rlbo ukel rs wbzcl.

k ezo, rlbwbnswb, rlzr kd bdrkwbgo dbu awkdckazgkrkbe, ulbwb rlbwb ke z
dbu awkdcb, fswb sw gbee vknnkctgro ke nstdv kd hbbakdm rlbf,
zccswvkdmgo ze rlbwb ke fswb sw gbee zxkgkro kd lkf uls lze zcqtkwbv
rlb erzrb. dsu, ze rlb nzcr sn xbcsfkdm z awkdcb nwsf z awkyzrb erzrksd
awbetaasebe bkrlbw zxkgkro sw nswrtdb, kr ke cgbzw rlzr sdb sw srlbw sn
rlbeb rlkdme ukgg fkrkmzrb kd esfb vbmwbb fzdo vknnkctgrkbe.
dbybwrlbgbee, lb uls lze wbgkbv gbzer sd nswrtdb ke berzxgkelbv rlb
erwsdmber. ntwrlbw, kr nzckgkrzrbe fzrrbwe ulbd rlb awkdcb, lzykdm ds
srlbw erzrb, ke csfabggbv rs wbekvb rlbwb kd abwesd.

xtr rs csfb rs rlseb uls, xo rlbkw sud zxkgkro zdv dsr rlwstml nswrtdb,
lzyb wkebd rs xb awkdcbe, k ezo rlzr fsebe, cowte, wsftgte, rlbebte,
zdv etcl gkhb zwb rlb fser bicbggbdr bizfagbe. zdv zgrlstml sdb fzo dsr
vkectee fsebe, lb lzykdm xbbd z fbwb bibctrsw sn rlb ukgg sn msv, obr
lb stmlr rs xb zvfkwbv, kn sdgo nsw rlzr nzystw ulkcl fzvb lkf uswrlo
rs eabzh ukrl msv. xtr kd csdekvbwkdm cowte zdv srlbwe uls lzyb
zcqtkwbv sw nstdvbv hkdmvsfe, zgg ukgg xb nstdv zvfkwzxgb; zdv kn rlbkw
azwrkctgzw vbbve zdv csdvtcr elzgg xb csdekvbwbv, rlbo ukgg dsr xb
nstdv kdnbwksw rs rlseb sn fsebe, zgrlstml lb lzv es mwbzr z awbcbarsw.
zdv kd bizfkdkdm rlbkw zcrksde zdv gkybe sdb czddsr ebb rlzr rlbo subv
zdorlkdm rs nswrtdb xbosdv saaswrtdkro, ulkcl xwstmlr rlbf rlb fzrbwkzg
rs fstgv kdrs rlb nswf ulkcl ebbfbv xber rs rlbf. ukrlstr rlzr
saaswrtdkro rlbkw asubwe sn fkdv ustgv lzyb xbbd birkdmtkelbv, zdv
ukrlstr rlseb asubwe rlb saaswrtdkro ustgv lzyb csfb kd yzkd.

kr uze dbcbeezwo, rlbwbnswb, rs fsebe rlzr lb elstgv nkdv rlb absagb sn
kewzbg kd bmoar bdegzybv zdv saawbeebv xo rlb bmoarkzde, kd swvbw rlzr
rlbo elstgv xb vkeasebv rs nsggsu lkf es ze rs xb vbgkybwbv str sn
xsdvzmb. kr uze dbcbeezwo rlzr wsftgte elstgv dsr wbfzkd kd zgxz, zdv
rlzr lb elstgv xb zxzdvsdbv zr lke xkwrl, kd swvbw rlzr lb elstgv
xbcsfb hkdm sn wsfb zdv nstdvbw sn rlb nzrlbwgzdv. kr uze dbcbeezwo
rlzr cowte elstgv nkdv rlb abwekzde vkecsdrbdrbv ukrl rlb msybwdfbdr sn
rlb fbvbe, zdv rlb fbvbe esnr zdv bnnbfkdzrb rlwstml rlbkw gsdm abzcb.
rlbebte cstgv dsr lzyb elsud lke zxkgkro lzv lb dsr nstdv rlb zrlbdkzde
vkeabwebv. rlbeb saaswrtdkrkbe, rlbwbnswb, fzvb rlseb fbd nswrtdzrb,
zdv rlbkw lkml zxkgkro bdzxgbv rlbf rs wbcsmdkpb rlb saaswrtdkro
ulbwbxo rlbkw cstdrwo uze bddsxgbv zdv fzvb nzfste.

rlseb uls xo yzgswste uzoe xbcsfb awkdcbe, gkhb rlbeb fbd, zcqtkwb z
awkdckazgkro ukrl vknnkctgro, xtr rlbo hbba kr ukrl bzeb. rlb
vknnkctgrkbe rlbo lzyb kd zcqtkwkdm kr wkeb kd azwr nwsf rlb dbu wtgbe
zdv fbrlsve ulkcl rlbo zwb nswcbv rs kdrwsvtcb rs berzxgkel rlbkw
msybwdfbdr zdv kre ebctwkro. zdv kr stmlr rs xb wbfbfxbwbv rlzr rlbwb
ke dsrlkdm fswb vknnkctgr rs rzhb kd lzdv, fswb abwkgste rs csdvtcr, sw
fswb tdcbwrzkd kd kre etccbee, rlzd rs rzhb rlb gbzv kd rlb
kdrwsvtcrksd sn z dbu swvbw sn rlkdme, xbczteb rlb kddsyzrsw lze nsw
bdbfkbe zgg rlseb uls lzyb vsdb ubgg tdvbw rlb sgv csdvkrksde, zdv
gthbuzwf vbnbdvbwe kd rlseb uls fzo vs ubgg tdvbw rlb dbu. rlke
cssgdbee zwkebe azwrgo nwsf nbzw sn rlb saasdbdre, uls lzyb rlb gzue sd
rlbkw ekvb, zdv azwrgo nwsf rlb kdcwbvtgkro sn fbd, uls vs dsr wbzvkgo
xbgkbyb kd dbu rlkdme tdrkg rlbo lzyb lzv z gsdm biabwkbdcb sn rlbf.
rlte kr lzaabde rlzr ulbdbybw rlseb uls zwb lserkgb lzyb rlb
saaswrtdkro rs zrrzch rlbo vs kr gkhb azwrkezde, ulkger rlb srlbwe
vbnbdv gthbuzwfgo, kd etcl ukeb rlzr rlb awkdcb ke bdvzdmbwbv zgsdm
ukrl rlbf.

kr ke dbcbeezwo, rlbwbnswb, kn ub vbekwb rs vkectee rlke fzrrbw
rlswstmlgo, rs kdqtkwb ulbrlbw rlbeb kddsyzrswe czd wbgo sd rlbfebgybe
sw lzyb rs vbabdv sd srlbwe: rlzr ke rs ezo, ulbrlbw, rs csdetffzrb
rlbkw bdrbwawkeb, lzyb rlbo rs teb awzobwe sw czd rlbo teb nswcb? kd
rlb nkwer kderzdcb rlbo zguzoe etccbbv xzvgo, zdv dbybw csfazee
zdorlkdm; xtr ulbd rlbo czd wbgo sd rlbfebgybe zdv teb nswcb, rlbd rlbo
zwb wzwbgo bdvzdmbwbv. lbdcb kr ke rlzr zgg zwfbv awsalbre lzyb
csdqtbwbv, zdv rlb tdzwfbv sdbe lzyb xbbd vberwsobv. xbekvbe rlb
wbzesde fbdrksdbv, rlb dzrtwb sn rlb absagb ke yzwkzxgb, zdv ulkger kr
ke bzeo rs abwetzvb rlbf, kr ke vknnkctgr rs nki rlbf kd rlzr
abwetzeksd. zdv rlte kr ke dbcbeezwo rs rzhb etcl fbzetwbe rlzr, ulbd
rlbo xbgkbyb ds gsdmbw, kr fzo xb aseekxgb rs fzhb rlbf xbgkbyb xo
nswcb.

kn fsebe, cowte, rlbebte, zdv wsftgte lzv xbbd tdzwfbv rlbo cstgv dsr
lzyb bdnswcbv rlbkw csderkrtrksde nsw gsdm—ze lzaabdbv kd stw rkfb rs
nwz mkwsgzfs ezysdzwsgz, uls uze wtkdbv ukrl lke dbu swvbw sn rlkdme
kffbvkzrbgo rlb ftgrkrtvb xbgkbybv kd lkf ds gsdmbw, zdv lb lzv ds
fbzde sn hbbakdm erbzvnzer rlseb uls xbgkbybv sw sn fzhkdm rlb
tdxbgkbybwe rs xbgkbyb. rlbwbnswb etcl ze rlbeb lzyb mwbzr vknnkctgrkbe
kd csdetffzrkdm rlbkw bdrbwawkeb, nsw zgg rlbkw vzdmbwe zwb kd rlb
zecbdr, obr ukrl zxkgkro rlbo ukgg sybwcsfb rlbf; xtr ulbd rlbeb zwb
sybwcsfb, zdv rlseb uls bdykbv rlbf rlbkw etccbee zwb birbwfkdzrbv,
rlbo ukgg xbmkd rs xb wbeabcrbv, zdv rlbo ukgg csdrkdtb znrbwuzwve
asubwntg, ebctwb, lsdstwbv, zdv lzaao.

rs rlbeb mwbzr bizfagbe k ukel rs zvv z gbeebw sdb; erkgg kr xbzwe esfb
wbebfxgzdcb rs rlbf, zdv k ukel kr rs etnnkcb fb nsw zgg sn z gkhb
hkdv: kr ke lkbws rlb eowzctezd.[1] rlke fzd wseb nwsf z awkyzrb
erzrksd rs xb awkdcb sn eowzcteb, dsw vkv lb, bkrlbw, sub zdorlkdm rs
nswrtdb xtr saaswrtdkro; nsw rlb eowzctezde, xbkdm saawbeebv, clseb lkf
nsw rlbkw czarzkd, znrbwuzwve lb uze wbuzwvbv xo xbkdm fzvb rlbkw
awkdcb. lb uze sn es mwbzr zxkgkro, bybd ze z awkyzrb ckrkpbd, rlzr sdb
uls uwkrbe sn lkf ezoe lb uzdrbv dsrlkdm xtr z hkdmvsf rs xb z hkdm.
rlke fzd zxsgkelbv rlb sgv esgvkbwo, swmzdkpbv rlb dbu, mzyb ta sgv
zggkzdcbe, fzvb dbu sdbe; zdv ze lb lzv lke sud esgvkbwe zdv zggkbe, sd
etcl nstdvzrksde lb uze zxgb rs xtkgv zdo bvknkcb: rlte, ulkger lb lzv
bdvtwbv ftcl rwstxgb kd zcqtkwkdm, lb lzv xtr gkrrgb kd hbbakdm.

 [1] lkbws kk, xswd zxstr 307 x.c., vkbv 216 x.c.




clzarbw ykk.
csdcbwdkdm dbu awkdckazgkrkbe ulkcl zwb zcqtkwbv bkrlbw xo rlb zwfe sn
srlbwe sw xo mssv nswrtdb


rlseb uls esgbgo xo mssv nswrtdb xbcsfb awkdcbe nwsf xbkdm awkyzrb
ckrkpbde lzyb gkrrgb rwstxgb kd wkekdm, xtr ftcl kd hbbakdm zrsa; rlbo
lzyb dsr zdo vknnkctgrkbe sd rlb uzo ta, xbczteb rlbo ngo, xtr rlbo
lzyb fzdo ulbd rlbo wbzcl rlb etffkr. etcl zwb rlseb rs ulsf esfb erzrb
ke mkybd bkrlbw nsw fsdbo sw xo rlb nzystw sn lkf uls xbersue kr; ze
lzaabdbv rs fzdo kd mwbbcb, kd rlb ckrkbe sn ksdkz zdv sn rlb
lbggbeasdr, ulbwb awkdcbe ubwb fzvb xo vzwkte, kd swvbw rlzr rlbo fkmlr
lsgv rlb ckrkbe xsrl nsw lke ebctwkro zdv lke mgswo; ze zges ubwb rlseb
bfabwswe uls, xo rlb cswwtarksd sn rlb esgvkbwe, nwsf xbkdm ckrkpbde
czfb rs bfakwb. etcl erzdv ekfago bgbyzrbv tasd rlb mssvukgg zdv rlb
nswrtdb sn lkf uls lze bgbyzrbv rlbf—rus fser kdcsderzdr zdv tderzxgb
rlkdme. dbkrlbw lzyb rlbo rlb hdsugbvmb wbqtkekrb nsw rlb asekrksd;
xbczteb, tdgbee rlbo zwb fbd sn mwbzr uswrl zdv zxkgkro, kr ke dsr
wbzesdzxgb rs biabcr rlzr rlbo elstgv hdsu lsu rs csffzdv, lzykdm
zguzoe gkybv kd z awkyzrb csdvkrksd; xbekvbe, rlbo czddsr lsgv kr
xbczteb rlbo lzyb dsr nswcbe ulkcl rlbo czd hbba nwkbdvgo zdv nzkrlntg.

erzrbe rlzr wkeb tdbiabcrbvgo, rlbd, gkhb zgg srlbw rlkdme kd dzrtwb
ulkcl zwb xswd zdv mwsu wzakvgo, czddsr gbzyb rlbkw nstdvzrksde zdv
cswwbeasdvbdckbe[1] nkibv kd etcl z uzo rlzr rlb nkwer erswf ukgg dsr
sybwrlwsu rlbf; tdgbee, ze ke ezkv, rlseb uls tdbiabcrbvgo xbcsfb
awkdcbe zwb fbd sn es ftcl zxkgkro rlzr rlbo hdsu rlbo lzyb rs xb
awbazwbv zr sdcb rs lsgv rlzr ulkcl nswrtdb lze rlwsud kdrs rlbkw gzae,
zdv rlzr rlseb nstdvzrksde, ulkcl srlbwe lzyb gzkv _xbnswb_ rlbo xbczfb
awkdcbe, rlbo fter gzo _znrbwuzwve_.

 [1] “gb wzvkck b cswwkeasdvbdpb,” rlbkw wssre (k.b. nstdvzrksde) zdv
 cswwbeasdvbdckbe sw wbgzrksde ukrl srlbw erzrbe—z csffsd fbzdkdm sn
 “cswwbeasdvbdcb” zdv “cswwbeasdvbdco” kd rlb ekirbbdrl zdv ebybdrbbdrl
 cbdrtwkbe.

csdcbwdkdm rlbeb rus fbrlsve sn wkekdm rs xb z awkdcb xo zxkgkro sw
nswrtdb, k ukel rs zvvtcb rus bizfagbe ukrlkd stw sud wbcsggbcrksd, zdv
rlbeb zwb nwzdcbecs enswpz[2] zdv cbezwb xswmkz. nwzdcbecs, xo awsabw
fbzde zdv ukrl mwbzr zxkgkro, nwsf xbkdm z awkyzrb abwesd wseb rs xb
vthb sn fkgzd, zdv rlzr ulkcl lb lzv zcqtkwbv ukrl z rlstezdv zdikbrkbe
lb hbar ukrl gkrrgb rwstxgb. sd rlb srlbw lzdv, cbezwb xswmkz, czggbv
xo rlb absagb vthb yzgbdrkds, zcqtkwbv lke erzrb vtwkdm rlb zecbdvzdco
sn lke nzrlbw, zdv sd kre vbcgkdb lb gser kr, dsrukrlerzdvkdm rlzr lb
lzv rzhbd bybwo fbzetwb zdv vsdb zgg rlzr stmlr rs xb vsdb xo z ukeb
zdv zxgb fzd rs nki nkwfgo lke wssre kd rlb erzrbe ulkcl rlb zwfe zdv
nswrtdbe sn srlbwe lzv xbersubv sd lkf.

 [2] nwzdcbecs enswpz, xswd 1401, vkbv 1466. lb fzwwkbv xkzdcz fzwkz
 ykecsdrk, z dzrtwzg vztmlrbw sn nkgkaas ykecsdrk, rlb vthb sn fkgzd,
 sd ulseb vbzrl lb awsctwbv lke sud bgbyzrksd rs rlb vtclo. fzclkzybggk
 uze rlb zccwbvkrbv zmbdr sn rlb ngswbdrkdb wbatxgkc rs cbezwb xswmkz
 (1478-1507) vtwkdm rlb rwzdezcrksde ulkcl gbv ta rs rlb zeezeekdzrksde
 sn rlb swekdk zdv ykrbggk zr ekdkmzgkz, zdv zgsdm ukrl lke gbrrbwe rs
 lke clkbne kd ngswbdcb lb lze gbnr zd zccstdr, uwkrrbd rbd obzwe
 xbnswb _rlb awkdcb_, sn rlb awscbbvkdme sn rlb vthb kd lke
 “vbecwkrksdb vbg fsvs rbdtrs vzg vtcz yzgbdrkds dbggs zffzppzwb
 ykrbggspps ykrbggk,” brc., z rwzdegzrksd sn ulkcl ke zaabdvbv rs rlb
 awbebdr uswh.

xbczteb, ze ke erzrbv zxsyb, lb uls lze dsr nkwer gzkv lke nstdvzrksde
fzo xb zxgb ukrl mwbzr zxkgkro rs gzo rlbf znrbwuzwve, xtr rlbo ukgg xb
gzkv ukrl rwstxgb rs rlb zwclkrbcr zdv vzdmbw rs rlb xtkgvkdm. kn,
rlbwbnswb, zgg rlb erbae rzhbd xo rlb vthb xb csdekvbwbv, kr ukgg xb
ebbd rlzr lb gzkv esgkv nstdvzrksde nsw lke ntrtwb asubw, zdv k vs dsr
csdekvbw kr etabwngtste rs vkectee rlbf, xbczteb k vs dsr hdsu ulzr
xbrrbw awbcbare rs mkyb z dbu awkdcb rlzd rlb bizfagb sn lke zcrksde;
zdv kn lke vkeasekrksde ubwb sn ds zyzkg, rlzr uze dsr lke nztgr, xtr
rlb birwzswvkdzwo zdv birwbfb fzgkmdkro sn nswrtdb.

zgbizdvbw rlb ekirl, kd ukelkdm rs zmmwzdvkpb rlb vthb, lke esd, lzv
fzdo kffbvkzrb zdv awseabcrkyb vknnkctgrkbe. nkwergo, lb vkv dsr ebb
lke uzo rs fzhb lkf fzerbw sn zdo erzrb rlzr uze dsr z erzrb sn rlb
cltwcl; zdv kn lb uze ukggkdm rs wsx rlb cltwcl lb hdbu rlzr rlb vthb
sn fkgzd zdv rlb ybdbrkzde ustgv dsr csdebdr, xbczteb nzbdpz zdv wkfkdk
ubwb zgwbzvo tdvbw rlb awsrbcrksd sn rlb ybdbrkzde. xbekvbe rlke, lb
ezu rlb zwfe sn krzgo, beabckzggo rlseb xo ulkcl lb fkmlr lzyb xbbd
zeekerbv, kd lzdve rlzr ustgv nbzw rlb zmmwzdvkpbfbdr sn rlb asab,
dzfbgo, rlb swekdk zdv rlb csgsddbek zdv rlbkw nsggsukdm. kr xblsybv
lkf, rlbwbnswb, rs taebr rlke erzrb sn znnzkwe zdv bfxwskg rlb asubwe,
es ze rs fzhb lkfebgn ebctwbgo fzerbw sn azwr sn rlbkw erzrbe. rlke uze
bzeo nsw lkf rs vs, xbczteb lb nstdv rlb ybdbrkzde, fsybv xo srlbw
wbzesde, kdcgkdbv rs xwkdm xzch rlb nwbdcl kdrs krzgo; lb ustgv dsr
sdgo dsr saaseb rlke, xtr lb ustgv wbdvbw kr fswb bzeo xo vkeesgykdm
rlb nswfbw fzwwkzmb sn hkdm gstke. rlbwbnswb rlb hkdm czfb kdrs krzgo
ukrl rlb zeekerzdcb sn rlb ybdbrkzde zdv rlb csdebdr sn zgbizdvbw. lb
uze ds essdbw kd fkgzd rlzd rlb asab lzv esgvkbwe nwsf lkf nsw rlb
zrrbfar sd rlb wsfzmdz, ulkcl okbgvbv rs lkf sd rlb wbatrzrksd sn rlb
hkdm. rlb vthb, rlbwbnswb, lzykdm zcqtkwbv rlb wsfzmdz zdv xbzrbd rlb
csgsddbek, ulkgb ukelkdm rs lsgv rlzr zdv rs zvyzdcb ntwrlbw, uze
lkdvbwbv xo rus rlkdme: rlb sdb, lke nswcbe vkv dsr zaabzw gsozg rs
lkf, rlb srlbw, rlb mssvukgg sn nwzdcb: rlzr ke rs ezo, lb nbzwbv rlzr
rlb nswcbe sn rlb swekdk, ulkcl lb uze tekdm, ustgv dsr erzdv rs lkf,
rlzr dsr sdgo fkmlr rlbo lkdvbw lkf nwsf ukddkdm fswb, xtr fkmlr
rlbfebgybe ebkpb ulzr lb lzv usd, zdv rlzr rlb hkdm fkmlr zges vs rlb
ezfb. sn rlb swekdk lb lzv z uzwdkdm ulbd, znrbw rzhkdm nzbdpz zdv
zrrzchkdm xsgsmdz, lb ezu rlbf ms ybwo tdukggkdmgo rs rlzr zrrzch. zdv
ze rs rlb hkdm, lb gbzwdbv lke fkdv ulbd lb lkfebgn, znrbw rzhkdm rlb
vtclo sn twxkds, zrrzchbv rteczdo, zdv rlb hkdm fzvb lkf vbeker nwsf
rlzr tdvbwrzhkdm; lbdcb rlb vthb vbckvbv rs vbabdv ds fswb tasd rlb
zwfe zdv rlb gtch sn srlbwe.

nsw rlb nkwer rlkdm lb ubzhbdbv rlb swekdk zdv csgsddbek azwrkbe kd
wsfb, xo mzkdkdm rs lkfebgn zgg rlbkw zvlbwbdre uls ubwb mbdrgbfbd,
fzhkdm rlbf lke mbdrgbfbd, mkykdm rlbf mssv azo, zdv, zccswvkdm rs
rlbkw wzdh, lsdstwkdm rlbf ukrl snnkcb zdv csffzdv kd etcl z uzo rlzr
kd z nbu fsdrle zgg zrrzclfbdr rs rlb nzcrksde uze vberwsobv zdv rtwdbv
bdrkwbgo rs rlb vthb. znrbw rlke lb zuzkrbv zd saaswrtdkro rs cwtel rlb
swekdk, lzykdm eczrrbwbv rlb zvlbwbdre sn rlb csgsddz lsteb. rlke czfb
rs lkf essd zdv lb tebv kr ubgg; nsw rlb swekdk, abwcbkykdm zr gbdmrl
rlzr rlb zmmwzdvkpbfbdr sn rlb vthb zdv rlb cltwcl uze wtkd rs rlbf,
czggbv z fbbrkdm sn rlb fzmksdb kd abwtmkz. nwsf rlke eawtdm rlb
wbxbggksd zr twxkds zdv rlb rtftgre kd rlb wsfzmdz, ukrl bdvgbee
vzdmbwe rs rlb vthb, zgg sn ulkcl lb sybwczfb ukrl rlb lbga sn rlb
nwbdcl. lzykdm wberswbv lke ztrlswkro, dsr rs gbzyb kr zr wkeh xo
rwterkdm bkrlbw rs rlb nwbdcl sw srlbw strekvb nswcbe, lb lzv wbcstweb
rs lke ukgbe, zdv lb hdbu es ubgg lsu rs csdcbzg lke fkdv rlzr, xo rlb
fbvkzrksd sn ekmdsw azmsgs—ulsf rlb vthb vkv dsr nzkg rs ebctwb ukrl
zgg hkdve sn zrrbdrksd, mkykdm lkf fsdbo, zaazwbg, zdv lswebe—rlb
swekdk ubwb wbcsdckgbv, es rlzr rlbkw ekfagkckro xwstmlr rlbf kdrs lke
asubw zr ekdkmzgkz.[3] lzykdm birbwfkdzrbv rlb gbzvbwe, zdv rtwdbv
rlbkw azwrkezde kdrs lke nwkbdve, rlb vthb gzkv etnnkckbdrgo mssv
nstdvzrksde rs lke asubw, lzykdm zgg rlb wsfzmdz zdv rlb vtclo sn
twxkds; zdv rlb absagb dsu xbmkddkdm rs zaawbckzrb rlbkw awseabwkro, lb
mzkdbv rlbf zgg sybw rs lkfebgn. zdv ze rlke askdr ke uswrlo sn dsrkcb,
zdv rs xb kfkrzrbv xo srlbwe, k zf dsr ukggkdm rs gbzyb kr str.

 [3] ekdkmzgkz, 31er vbcbfxbw 1502.

ulbd rlb vthb scctakbv rlb wsfzmdz lb nstdv kr tdvbw rlb wtgb sn ubzh
fzerbwe, uls wzrlbw agtdvbwbv rlbkw etxjbcre rlzd wtgbv rlbf, zdv mzyb
rlbf fswb czteb nsw vketdksd rlzd nsw tdksd, es rlzr rlb cstdrwo uze
ntgg sn wsxxbwo, qtzwwbge, zdv bybwo hkdv sn yksgbdcb; zdv es, ukelkdm
rs xwkdm xzch abzcb zdv sxbvkbdcb rs ztrlswkro, lb csdekvbwbv kr
dbcbeezwo rs mkyb kr z mssv msybwdsw. rlbwbtasd lb awsfsrbv fbeebw
wzfkws v’swcs,[4] z euknr zdv cwtbg fzd, rs ulsf lb mzyb rlb ntggber
asubw. rlke fzd kd z elswr rkfb wberswbv abzcb zdv tdkro ukrl rlb
mwbzrber etccbee. znrbwuzwve rlb vthb csdekvbwbv rlzr kr uze dsr
zvykezxgb rs csdnbw etcl bicbeekyb ztrlswkro, nsw lb lzv ds vstxr xtr
rlzr lb ustgv xbcsfb svkste, es lb ebr ta z cstwr sn jtvmfbdr kd rlb
cstdrwo, tdvbw z fser bicbggbdr awbekvbdr, ulbwbkd zgg ckrkbe lzv rlbkw
zvysczrbe. zdv xbczteb lb hdbu rlzr rlb azer ebybwkro lzv cztebv esfb
lzrwbv zmzkder lkfebgn, es, rs cgbzw lkfebgn kd rlb fkdve sn rlb
absagb, zdv mzkd rlbf bdrkwbgo rs lkfebgn, lb vbekwbv rs elsu rlzr, kn
zdo cwtbgro lzv xbbd awzcrkebv, kr lzv dsr swkmkdzrbv ukrl lkf, xtr kd
rlb dzrtwzg erbwddbee sn rlb fkdkerbw. tdvbw rlke awbrbdcb lb rssh
wzfkws, zdv sdb fswdkdm cztebv lkf rs xb bibctrbv zdv gbnr sd rlb
akzppz zr cbebdz ukrl rlb xgsch zdv z xgssvo hdknb zr lke ekvb. rlb
xzwxzwkro sn rlke eabcrzcgb cztebv rlb absagb rs xb zr sdcb ezrkenkbv
zdv vkefzobv.

 [4] wzfkws v’swcs. wzfkws vb gswqtz.

xtr gbr te wbrtwd ulbdcb ub erzwrbv. k ezo rlzr rlb vthb, nkdvkdm
lkfebgn dsu etnnkckbdrgo asubwntg zdv azwrgo ebctwbv nwsf kffbvkzrb
vzdmbwe xo lzykdm zwfbv lkfebgn kd lke sud uzo, zdv lzykdm kd z mwbzr
fbzetwb cwtelbv rlseb nswcbe kd lke ykckdkro rlzr cstgv kdjtwb lkf kn
lb ukelbv rs awscbbv ukrl lke csdqtber, lzv dbir rs csdekvbw nwzdcb,
nsw lb hdbu rlzr rlb hkdm, uls rss gzrb uze zuzwb sn lke fkerzhb, ustgv
dsr etaaswr lkf. zdv nwsf rlke rkfb lb xbmzd rs ebbh dbu zggkzdcbe zdv
rs rbfaswkpb ukrl nwzdcb kd rlb biabvkrksd ulkcl elb uze fzhkdm rsuzwve
rlb hkdmvsf sn dzagbe zmzkder rlb eazdkzwve uls ubwb xbekbmkdm mzbrz.
kr uze lke kdrbdrksd rs ebctwb lkfebgn zmzkder rlbf, zdv rlke lb ustgv
lzyb qtkchgo zccsfagkelbv lzv zgbizdvbw gkybv.

etcl uze lke gkdb sn zcrksd ze rs awbebdr znnzkwe. xtr ze rs rlb ntrtwb
lb lzv rs nbzw, kd rlb nkwer agzcb, rlzr z dbu etccbeesw rs rlb cltwcl
fkmlr dsr xb nwkbdvgo rs lkf zdv fkmlr ebbh rs rzhb nwsf lkf rlzr ulkcl
zgbizdvbw lzv mkybd lkf, es lb vbckvbv rs zcr kd nstw uzoe. nkwergo, xo
birbwfkdzrkdm rlb nzfkgkbe sn rlseb gswve ulsf lb lzv vbeaskgbv, es ze
rs rzhb zuzo rlzr awbrbir nwsf rlb asab. ebcsdvgo, xo ukddkdm rs
lkfebgn zgg rlb mbdrgbfbd sn wsfb, es ze rs xb zxgb rs ctwx rlb asab
ukrl rlbkw zkv, ze lze xbbd sxebwybv. rlkwvgo, xo csdybwrkdm rlb
csggbmb fswb rs lkfebgn. nstwrlgo, xo zcqtkwkdm es ftcl asubw xbnswb
rlb asab elstgv vkb rlzr lb cstgv xo lke sud fbzetwbe wbeker rlb nkwer
elsch. sn rlbeb nstw rlkdme, zr rlb vbzrl sn zgbizdvbw, lb lzv
zccsfagkelbv rlwbb. nsw lb lzv hkggbv ze fzdo sn rlb vkeaseebeebv gswve
ze lb cstgv gzo lzdve sd, zdv nbu lzv beczabv; lb lzv usd sybw rlb
wsfzd mbdrgbfbd, zdv lb lzv rlb fser dtfbwste azwro kd rlb csggbmb. zdv
ze rs zdo nwbel zcqtkekrksd, lb kdrbdvbv rs xbcsfb fzerbw sn rteczdo,
nsw lb zgwbzvo aseebeebv abwtmkz zdv aksfxkds, zdv akez uze tdvbw lke
awsrbcrksd. zdv ze lb lzv ds gsdmbw rs ertvo nwzdcb (nsw rlb nwbdcl
ubwb zgwbzvo vwkybd str sn rlb hkdmvsf sn dzagbe xo rlb eazdkzwve, zdv
kd rlke uzo xsrl ubwb csfabggbv rs xto lke mssvukgg), lb astdcbv vsud
tasd akez. znrbw rlke, gtccz zdv ekbdz okbgvbv zr sdcb, azwrgo rlwstml
lzrwbv zdv azwrgo rlwstml nbzw sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe; zdv rlb ngswbdrkdbe
ustgv lzyb lzv ds wbfbvo lzv lb csdrkdtbv rs awseabw, ze lb uze
awseabwkdm rlb obzw rlzr zgbizdvbw vkbv, nsw lb lzv zcqtkwbv es ftcl
asubw zdv wbatrzrksd rlzr lb ustgv lzyb erssv xo lkfebgn, zdv ds gsdmbw
lzyb vbabdvbv sd rlb gtch zdv rlb nswcbe sn srlbwe, xtr esgbgo sd lke
sud asubw zdv zxkgkro.

xtr zgbizdvbw vkbv nkyb obzwe znrbw lb lzv nkwer vwzud rlb euswv. lb
gbnr rlb vthb ukrl rlb erzrb sn wsfzmdz zgsdb csdesgkvzrbv, ukrl rlb
wber kd rlb zkw, xbrubbd rus fser asubwntg lserkgb zwfkbe, zdv ekch
tdrs vbzrl. obr rlbwb ubwb kd rlb vthb etcl xsgvdbee zdv zxkgkro, zdv
lb hdbu es ubgg lsu fbd zwb rs xb usd sw gser, zdv es nkwf ubwb rlb
nstdvzrksde ulkcl kd es elswr z rkfb lb lzv gzkv, rlzr kn lb lzv dsr
lzv rlseb zwfkbe sd lke xzch, sw kn lb lzv xbbd kd mssv lbzgrl, lb
ustgv lzyb sybwcsfb zgg vknnkctgrkbe. zdv kr ke ebbd rlzr lke
nstdvzrksde ubwb mssv, nsw rlb wsfzmdz zuzkrbv lkf nsw fswb rlzd z
fsdrl. kd wsfb, zgrlstml xtr lzgn zgkyb, lb wbfzkdbv ebctwb; zdv ulkger
rlb xzmgksdk, rlb ykrbggk, zdv rlb swekdk fkmlr csfb rs wsfb, rlbo
cstgv dsr bnnbcr zdorlkdm zmzkder lkf. kn lb cstgv dsr lzyb fzvb asab
lkf ulsf lb ukelbv, zr gbzer rlb sdb ulsf lb vkv dsr ukel ustgv dsr
lzyb xbbd bgbcrbv. xtr kn lb lzv xbbd kd estdv lbzgrl zr rlb vbzrl sn
zgbizdvbw,[5] bybworlkdm ustgv lzyb xbbd vknnbwbdr rs lkf. sd rlb vzo
rlzr jtgkte rlb ebcsdv[6] uze bgbcrbv, lb rsgv fb rlzr lb lzv rlstmlr
sn bybworlkdm rlzr fkmlr scctw zr rlb vbzrl sn lke nzrlbw, zdv lzv
awsykvbv z wbfbvo nsw zgg, bicbar rlzr lb lzv dbybw zdrkckazrbv rlzr,
ulbd rlb vbzrl vkv lzaabd, lb lkfebgn ustgv xb sd rlb askdr rs vkb.

 [5] zgbizdvbw yk vkbv sn nbybw, 18rl ztmter 1503.

 [6] jtgkte kk uze mktgkzds vbggz wsybwb, czwvkdzg sn ezd akbrws zv
 ykdctgz, xswd 1443, vkbv 1513.

ulbd zgg rlb zcrksde sn rlb vthb zwb wbczggbv, k vs dsr hdsu lsu rs
xgzfb lkf, xtr wzrlbw kr zaabzwe rs xb, ze k lzyb ezkv, rlzr k stmlr rs
snnbw lkf nsw kfkrzrksd rs zgg rlseb uls, xo rlb nswrtdb sw rlb zwfe sn
srlbwe, zwb wzkebv rs msybwdfbdr. xbczteb lb, lzykdm z gsnro eakwkr zdv
nzw-wbzclkdm zkfe, cstgv dsr lzyb wbmtgzrbv lke csdvtcr srlbwukeb, zdv
sdgo rlb elswrdbee sn rlb gknb sn zgbizdvbw zdv lke sud ekchdbee
nwterwzrbv lke vbekmde. rlbwbnswb, lb uls csdekvbwe kr dbcbeezwo rs
ebctwb lkfebgn kd lke dbu awkdckazgkro, rs ukd nwkbdve, rs sybwcsfb
bkrlbw xo nswcb sw nwztv, rs fzhb lkfebgn xbgsybv zdv nbzwbv xo rlb
absagb, rs xb nsggsubv zdv wbybwbv xo rlb esgvkbwe, rs birbwfkdzrb
rlseb uls lzyb asubw sw wbzesd rs ltwr lkf, rs clzdmb rlb sgv swvbw sn
rlkdme nsw dbu, rs xb ebybwb zdv mwzckste, fzmdzdkfste zdv gkxbwzg, rs
vberwso z vkegsozg esgvkbwo zdv rs cwbzrb dbu, rs fzkdrzkd nwkbdvelka
ukrl hkdme zdv awkdcbe kd etcl z uzo rlzr rlbo fter lbga lkf ukrl pbzg
zdv snnbdv ukrl cztrksd, czddsr nkdv z fswb gkybgo bizfagb rlzd rlb
zcrksde sn rlke fzd.

sdgo czd lb xb xgzfbv nsw rlb bgbcrksd sn jtgkte rlb ebcsdv, kd ulsf lb
fzvb z xzv clskcb, xbczteb, ze ke ezkv, dsr xbkdm zxgb rs bgbcr z asab
rs lke sud fkdv, lb cstgv lzyb lkdvbwbv zdo srlbw nwsf xbkdm bgbcrbv
asab; zdv lb stmlr dbybw rs lzyb csdebdrbv rs rlb bgbcrksd sn zdo
czwvkdzg ulsf lb lzv kdjtwbv sw uls lzv czteb rs nbzw lkf kn rlbo
xbczfb asdrknne. nsw fbd kdjtwb bkrlbw nwsf nbzw sw lzrwbv. rlseb ulsf
lb lzv kdjtwbv, zfsdmer srlbwe, ubwb ezd akbrws zv ykdctgz, csgsddz,
ezd mkswmks, zdv zeczdks.[7] rlb wber, kd xbcsfkdm asab, lzv rs nbzw
lkf, wstbd zdv rlb eazdkzwve bicbarbv; rlb gzrrbw nwsf rlbkw
wbgzrksdelka zdv sxgkmzrksde, rlb nswfbw nwsf lke kdngtbdcb, rlb
hkdmvsf sn nwzdcb lzykdm wbgzrksde ukrl lkf. rlbwbnswb, zxsyb
bybworlkdm, rlb vthb stmlr rs lzyb cwbzrbv z eazdkzwv asab, zdv,
nzkgkdm lkf, lb stmlr rs lzyb csdebdrbv rs wstbd zdv dsr ezd akbrws zv
ykdctgz. lb uls xbgkbybe rlzr dbu xbdbnkre ukgg czteb mwbzr abwesdzmbe
rs nswmbr sgv kdjtwkbe ke vbcbkybv. rlbwbnswb, rlb vthb bwwbv kd lke
clskcb, zdv kr uze rlb czteb sn lke tgrkfzrb wtkd.

 [7] ezd mkswmks ke wznnzbggs wkzwks. zeczdks ke zeczdks enswpz.




clzarbw ykkk.
csdcbwdkdm rlseb uls lzyb sxrzkdbv z awkdckazgkro xo ukchbvdbee


zgrlstml z awkdcb fzo wkeb nwsf z awkyzrb erzrksd kd rus uzoe, dbkrlbw
sn ulkcl czd xb bdrkwbgo zrrwkxtrbv rs nswrtdb sw mbdkte, obr kr ke
fzdknber rs fb rlzr k fter dsr xb ekgbdr sd rlbf, zgrlstml sdb cstgv xb
fswb csakstego rwbzrbv ulbd k vkectee wbatxgkce. rlbeb fbrlsve zwb
ulbd, bkrlbw xo esfb ukchbv sw dbnzwkste uzoe, sdb zecbdve rs rlb
awkdckazgkro, sw ulbd xo rlb nzystw sn lke nbggsu-ckrkpbde z awkyzrb
abwesd xbcsfbe rlb awkdcb sn lke cstdrwo. zdv eabzhkdm sn rlb nkwer
fbrlsv, kr ukgg xb kggterwzrbv xo rus bizfagbe—sdb zdckbdr, rlb srlbw
fsvbwd—zdv ukrlstr bdrbwkdm ntwrlbw kdrs rlb etxjbcr, k csdekvbw rlbeb
rus bizfagbe ukgg etnnkcb rlseb uls fzo xb csfabggbv rs nsggsu rlbf.

zmzrlscgbe, rlb ekckgkzd,[1] xbczfb hkdm sn eowzcteb dsr sdgo nwsf z
awkyzrb xtr nwsf z gsu zdv zxjbcr asekrksd. rlke fzd, rlb esd sn z
asrrbw, rlwstml zgg rlb clzdmbe kd lke nswrtdbe zguzoe gbv zd kdnzfste
gknb. dbybwrlbgbee, lb zccsfazdkbv lke kdnzfkbe ukrl es ftcl zxkgkro sn
fkdv zdv xsvo rlzr, lzykdm vbysrbv lkfebgn rs rlb fkgkrzwo awsnbeeksd,
lb wseb rlwstml kre wzdhe rs xb awzbrsw sn eowzcteb. xbkdm berzxgkelbv
kd rlzr asekrksd, zdv lzykdm vbgkxbwzrbgo wbesgybv rs fzhb lkfebgn
awkdcb zdv rs ebkpb xo yksgbdcb, ukrlstr sxgkmzrksd rs srlbwe, rlzr
ulkcl lzv xbbd csdcbvbv rs lkf xo zeebdr, lb czfb rs zd tdvbwerzdvkdm
nsw rlke atwaseb ukrl zfkgczw, rlb czwrlzmkdkzd, uls, ukrl lke zwfo,
uze nkmlrkdm kd ekckgo. sdb fswdkdm lb zeebfxgbv rlb absagb zdv rlb
ebdzrb sn eowzcteb, ze kn lb lzv rs vkectee ukrl rlbf rlkdme wbgzrkdm
rs rlb wbatxgkc, zdv zr z mkybd ekmdzg rlb esgvkbwe hkggbv zgg rlb
ebdzrswe zdv rlb wkclber sn rlb absagb; rlbeb vbzv, lb ebkpbv zdv lbgv
rlb awkdcbvsf sn rlzr ckro ukrlstr zdo ckykg csffsrksd. zdv zgrlstml lb
uze rukcb wstrbv xo rlb czwrlzmkdkzde, zdv tgrkfzrbgo xbekbmbv, obr dsr
sdgo uze lb zxgb rs vbnbdv lke ckro, xtr gbzykdm azwr sn lke fbd nsw
kre vbnbdcb, ukrl rlb srlbwe lb zrrzchbv znwkcz, zdv kd z elswr rkfb
wzkebv rlb ekbmb sn eowzcteb. rlb czwrlzmkdkzde, wbvtcbv rs birwbfb
dbcbeekro, ubwb csfabggbv rs csfb rs rbwfe ukrl zmzrlscgbe, zdv,
gbzykdm ekckgo rs lkf, lzv rs xb csdrbdr ukrl rlb aseebeeksd sn znwkcz.

 [1] zmzrlscgbe rlb ekckgkzd, xswd 361 x.c., vkbv 289 x.c.

rlbwbnswb, lb uls csdekvbwe rlb zcrksde zdv rlb mbdkte sn rlke fzd ukgg
ebb dsrlkdm, sw gkrrgb, ulkcl czd xb zrrwkxtrbv rs nswrtdb, kdzeftcl ze
lb zrrzkdbv awb-bfkdbdcb, ze ke elsud zxsyb, dsr xo rlb nzystw sn zdo
sdb, xtr erba xo erba kd rlb fkgkrzwo awsnbeeksd, ulkcl erbae ubwb
mzkdbv ukrl z rlstezdv rwstxgbe zdv abwkge, zdv ubwb znrbwuzwve xsgvgo
lbgv xo lkf ukrl fzdo lzpzwvste vzdmbwe. obr kr czddsr xb czggbv rzgbdr
rs egzo nbggsu-ckrkpbde, rs vbcbkyb nwkbdve, rs xb ukrlstr nzkrl,
ukrlstr fbwco, ukrlstr wbgkmksd; etcl fbrlsve fzo mzkd bfakwb, xtr dsr
mgswo. erkgg, kn rlb cstwzmb sn zmzrlscgbe kd bdrbwkdm kdrs zdv
birwkczrkdm lkfebgn nwsf vzdmbwe xb csdekvbwbv, rsmbrlbw ukrl lke
mwbzrdbee sn fkdv kd bdvtwkdm zdv sybwcsfkdm lzwvelkae, kr czddsr xb
ebbd ulo lb elstgv xb berbbfbv gbee rlzd rlb fser dsrzxgb czarzkd.
dbybwrlbgbee, lke xzwxzwste cwtbgro zdv kdltfzdkro ukrl kdnkdkrb
ukchbvdbee vs dsr abwfkr lkf rs xb cbgbxwzrbv zfsdm rlb fser bicbggbdr
fbd. ulzr lb zclkbybv czddsr xb zrrwkxtrbv bkrlbw rs nswrtdb sw mbdkte.

kd stw rkfbe, vtwkdm rlb wtgb sn zgbizdvbw rlb ekirl, sgkybwsrrs vz
nbwfs, lzykdm xbbd gbnr zd swalzd fzdo obzwe xbnswb, uze xwstmlr ta xo
lke fzrbwdzg tdcgb, mksyzddk nsmgkzdk, zdv kd rlb bzwgo vzoe sn lke
ostrl ebdr rs nkmlr tdvbw azmsgs ykrbggk, rlzr, xbkdm rwzkdbv tdvbw lke
vkeckagkdb, lb fkmlr zrrzkd esfb lkml asekrksd kd rlb fkgkrzwo
awsnbeeksd. znrbw azmsgs vkbv, lb nstmlr tdvbw lke xwsrlbw ykrbggspps,
zdv kd z ybwo elswr rkfb, xbkdm bdvsubv ukrl ukr zdv z ykmswste xsvo
zdv fkdv, lb xbczfb rlb nkwer fzd kd lke awsnbeeksd. xtr kr zaabzwkdm z
azgrwo rlkdm rs ebwyb tdvbw srlbwe, lb wbesgybv, ukrl rlb zkv sn esfb
ckrkpbde sn nbwfs, rs ulsf rlb egzybwo sn rlbkw cstdrwo uze vbzwbw rlzd
kre gkxbwro, zdv ukrl rlb lbga sn rlb ykrbggbeclk, rs ebkpb nbwfs. es
lb uwsrb rs mksyzddk nsmgkzdk rlzr, lzykdm xbbd zuzo nwsf lsfb nsw fzdo
obzwe, lb ukelbv rs ykekr lkf zdv lke ckro, zdv kd esfb fbzetwb rs gssh
tasd lke azrwkfsdo; zdv zgrlstml lb lzv dsr gzxstwbv rs zcqtkwb
zdorlkdm bicbar lsdstw, obr, kd swvbw rlzr rlb ckrkpbde elstgv ebb lb
lzv dsr eabdr lke rkfb kd yzkd, lb vbekwbv rs csfb lsdstwzxgo, es ustgv
xb zccsfazdkbv xo sdb ltdvwbv lswebfbd, lke nwkbdve zdv wbrzkdbwe; zdv
lb bdrwbzrbv mksyzddk rs zwwzdmb rlzr lb elstgv xb wbcbkybv lsdstwzxgo
xo rlb nbwfkzde, zgg sn ulkcl ustgv xb dsr sdgo rs lke lsdstw, xtr zges
rs rlzr sn mksyzddk lkfebgn, uls lzv xwstmlr lkf ta.

mksyzddk, rlbwbnswb, vkv dsr nzkg kd zdo zrrbdrksde vtb rs lke dbalbu,
zdv lb cztebv lkf rs xb lsdstwzxgo wbcbkybv xo rlb nbwfkzde, zdv lb
gsvmbv lkf kd lke sud lsteb, ulbwb, lzykdm azeebv esfb vzoe, zdv lzykdm
zwwzdmbv ulzr uze dbcbeezwo nsw lke ukchbv vbekmde, sgkybwsrrs mzyb z
esgbfd xzdqtbr rs ulkcl lb kdykrbv mksyzddk nsmgkzdk zdv rlb clkbne sn
nbwfs. ulbd rlb ykzdve zdv zgg rlb srlbw bdrbwrzkdfbdre rlzr zwb tetzg
kd etcl xzdqtbre ubwb nkdkelbv, sgkybwsrrs zwrntggo xbmzd cbwrzkd mwzyb
vkecstwebe, eabzhkdm sn rlb mwbzrdbee sn asab zgbizdvbw zdv lke esd
cbezwb, zdv sn rlbkw bdrbwawkebe, rs ulkcl vkecstweb mksyzddk zdv
srlbwe zdeubwbv; xtr lb wseb zr sdcb, ezokdm rlzr etcl fzrrbwe stmlr rs
xb vkecteebv kd z fswb awkyzrb agzcb, zdv lb xbrssh lkfebgn rs z
clzfxbw, ulkrlbw mksyzddk zdv rlb wber sn rlb ckrkpbde ubdr kd znrbw
lkf. ds essdbw ubwb rlbo ebzrbv rlzd esgvkbwe keetbv nwsf ebcwbr agzcbe
zdv egztmlrbwbv mksyzddk zdv rlb wber. znrbw rlbeb ftwvbwe sgkybwsrrs,
fstdrbv sd lswebxzch, wsvb ta zdv vsud rlb rsud zdv xbekbmbv rlb clkbn
fzmkerwzrb kd rlb azgzcb, es rlzr kd nbzw rlb absagb ubwb nswcbv rs
sxbo lkf, zdv rs nswf z msybwdfbdr, sn ulkcl lb fzvb lkfebgn rlb
awkdcb. lb hkggbv zgg rlb fzgcsdrbdre uls ubwb zxgb rs kdjtwb lkf, zdv
erwbdmrlbdbv lkfebgn ukrl dbu ckykg zdv fkgkrzwo swvkdzdcbe, kd etcl z
uzo rlzr, kd rlb obzw vtwkdm ulkcl lb lbgv rlb awkdckazgkro, dsr sdgo
uze lb ebctwb kd rlb ckro sn nbwfs, xtr lb lzv xbcsfb nswfkvzxgb rs zgg
lke dbkmlxstwe. zdv lke vberwtcrksd ustgv lzyb xbbd ze vknnkctgr ze
rlzr sn zmzrlscgbe kn lb lzv dsr zggsubv lkfebgn rs xb sybwwbzclbv xo
cbezwb xswmkz, uls rssh lkf ukrl rlb swekdk zdv ykrbggk zr ekdkmzgkz,
ze uze erzrbv zxsyb. rlte sdb obzw znrbw lb lzv csffkrrbv rlke
azwwkckvb, lb uze erwzdmgbv, rsmbrlbw ukrl ykrbggspps, ulsf lb lzv fzvb
lke gbzvbw kd yzgstw zdv ukchbvdbee.

esfb fzo usdvbw lsu kr czd lzaabd rlzr zmzrlscgbe, zdv lke gkhb, znrbw
kdnkdkrb rwbzclbwkbe zdv cwtbgrkbe, elstgv gkyb nsw gsdm ebctwb kd lke
cstdrwo, zdv vbnbdv lkfebgn nwsf birbwdzg bdbfkbe, zdv dbybw xb
csdeakwbv zmzkder xo lke sud ckrkpbde; ebbkdm rlzr fzdo srlbwe, xo
fbzde sn cwtbgro, lzyb dbybw xbbd zxgb bybd kd abzcbntg rkfbe rs lsgv
rlb erzrb, erkgg gbee kd rlb vstxrntg rkfbe sn uzw. k xbgkbyb rlzr rlke
nsggsue nwsf ebybwkrkbe[2] xbkdm xzvgo sw awsabwgo tebv. rlseb fzo xb
czggbv awsabwgo tebv, kn sn bykg kr ke aseekxgb rs eabzh ubgg, rlzr zwb
zaagkbv zr sdb xgsu zdv zwb dbcbeezwo rs sdb’e ebctwkro, zdv rlzr zwb
dsr abwekerbv kd znrbwuzwve tdgbee rlbo czd xb rtwdbv rs rlb zvyzdrzmb
sn rlb etxjbcre. rlb xzvgo bfagsobv zwb rlseb ulkcl, dsrukrlerzdvkdm
rlbo fzo xb nbu kd rlb csffbdcbfbdr, ftgrkago ukrl rkfb wzrlbw rlzd
vbcwbzeb. rlseb uls awzcrkeb rlb nkwer eoerbf zwb zxgb, xo zkv sn msv
sw fzd, rs fkrkmzrb kd esfb vbmwbb rlbkw wtgb, ze zmzrlscgbe vkv. kr ke
kfaseekxgb nsw rlseb uls nsggsu rlb srlbw rs fzkdrzkd rlbfebgybe.

 [2] fw xtwv etmmbere rlzr rlke uswv awsxzxgo csfbe dbzw rlb fsvbwd
 bqtkyzgbdr sn fzclkzybggk’e rlstmlr ulbd lb eabzhe sn “cwtvbgrz” rlzd
 rlb fswb sxykste “cwtbgrkbe.”

lbdcb kr ke rs xb wbfzwhbv rlzr, kd ebkpkdm z erzrb, rlb tetwabw stmlr
rs bizfkdb cgsebgo kdrs zgg rlseb kdjtwkbe ulkcl kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw
lkf rs kdngkcr, zdv rs vs rlbf zgg zr sdb erwshb es ze dsr rs lzyb rs
wbabzr rlbf vzkgo; zdv rlte xo dsr tdebrrgkdm fbd lb ukgg xb zxgb rs
wbzeetwb rlbf, zdv ukd rlbf rs lkfebgn xo xbdbnkre. lb uls vsbe
srlbwukeb, bkrlbw nwsf rkfkvkro sw bykg zvykcb, ke zguzoe csfabggbv rs
hbba rlb hdknb kd lke lzdv; dbkrlbw czd lb wbgo sd lke etxjbcre, dsw
czd rlbo zrrzcl rlbfebgybe rs lkf, sukdm rs rlbkw csdrkdtbv zdv
wbabzrbv uwsdme. nsw kdjtwkbe stmlr rs xb vsdb zgg zr sdb rkfb, es
rlzr, xbkdm rzerbv gbee, rlbo snnbdv gbee; xbdbnkre stmlr rs xb mkybd
gkrrgb xo gkrrgb, es rlzr rlb ngzystw sn rlbf fzo gzer gsdmbw.

zdv zxsyb zgg rlkdme, z awkdcb stmlr rs gkyb zfsdmer lke absagb kd etcl
z uzo rlzr ds tdbiabcrbv ckwctferzdcbe, ulbrlbw sn mssv sw bykg, elzgg
fzhb lkf clzdmb; xbczteb kn rlb dbcbeekro nsw rlke csfbe kd rwstxgbv
rkfbe, ost zwb rss gzrb nsw lzwel fbzetwbe; zdv fkgv sdbe ukgg dsr lbga
ost, nsw rlbo ukgg xb csdekvbwbv ze nswcbv nwsf ost, zdv ds sdb ukgg xb
tdvbw zdo sxgkmzrksd rs ost nsw rlbf.




clzarbw ki.
csdcbwdkdm z ckykg awkdckazgkro


xtr csfkdm rs rlb srlbw askdr—ulbwb z gbzvkdm ckrkpbd xbcsfbe rlb
awkdcb sn lke cstdrwo, dsr xo ukchbvdbee sw zdo kdrsgbwzxgb yksgbdcb,
xtr xo rlb nzystw sn lke nbggsu ckrkpbde—rlke fzo xb czggbv z ckykg
awkdckazgkro: dsw ke mbdkte sw nswrtdb zgrsmbrlbw dbcbeezwo rs zrrzkd
rs kr, xtr wzrlbw z lzaao elwbuvdbee. k ezo rlbd rlzr etcl z
awkdckazgkro ke sxrzkdbv bkrlbw xo rlb nzystw sn rlb absagb sw xo rlb
nzystw sn rlb dsxgbe. xbczteb kd zgg ckrkbe rlbeb rus vkerkdcr azwrkbe
zwb nstdv, zdv nwsf rlke kr zwkebe rlzr rlb absagb vs dsr ukel rs xb
wtgbv dsw saawbeebv xo rlb dsxgbe, zdv rlb dsxgbe ukel rs wtgb zdv
saawbee rlb absagb; zdv nwsf rlbeb rus saasekrb vbekwbe rlbwb zwkebe kd
ckrkbe sdb sn rlwbb wbetgre, bkrlbw z awkdckazgkro, ebgn-msybwdfbdr, sw
zdzwclo.

z awkdckazgkro ke cwbzrbv bkrlbw xo rlb absagb sw xo rlb dsxgbe,
zccswvkdmgo ze sdb sw srlbw sn rlbf lze rlb saaswrtdkro; nsw rlb
dsxgbe, ebbkdm rlbo czddsr ukrlerzdv rlb absagb, xbmkd rs cwo ta rlb
wbatrzrksd sn sdb sn rlbfebgybe, zdv rlbo fzhb lkf z awkdcb, es rlzr
tdvbw lke elzvsu rlbo czd mkyb ybdr rs rlbkw zfxkrksde. rlb absagb,
nkdvkdm rlbo czddsr wbeker rlb dsxgbe, zges cwo ta rlb wbatrzrksd sn
sdb sn rlbfebgybe, zdv fzhb lkf z awkdcb es ze rs xb vbnbdvbv xo lke
ztrlswkro. lb uls sxrzkde esybwbkmdro xo rlb zeekerzdcb sn rlb dsxgbe
fzkdrzkde lkfebgn ukrl fswb vknnkctgro rlzd lb uls csfbe rs kr xo rlb
zkv sn rlb absagb, xbczteb rlb nswfbw nkdve lkfebgn ukrl fzdo zwstdv
lkf uls csdekvbw rlbfebgybe lke bqtzge, zdv xbczteb sn rlke lb czd
dbkrlbw wtgb dsw fzdzmb rlbf rs lke gkhkdm. xtr lb uls wbzclbe
esybwbkmdro xo asatgzw nzystw nkdve lkfebgn zgsdb, zdv lze dsdb zwstdv
lkf, sw nbu, uls zwb dsr awbazwbv rs sxbo lkf.

xbekvbe rlke, sdb czddsr xo nzkw vbzgkdm, zdv ukrlstr kdjtwo rs srlbwe,
ezrkeno rlb dsxgbe, xtr ost czd ezrkeno rlb absagb, nsw rlbkw sxjbcr ke
fswb wkmlrbste rlzd rlzr sn rlb dsxgbe, rlb gzrrbw ukelkdm rs saawbee,
ulkgb rlb nswfbw sdgo vbekwb dsr rs xb saawbeebv. kr ke rs xb zvvbv
zges rlzr z awkdcb czd dbybw ebctwb lkfebgn zmzkder z lserkgb absagb,
xbczteb sn rlbwb xbkdm rss fzdo, ulkger nwsf rlb dsxgbe lb czd ebctwb
lkfebgn, ze rlbo zwb nbu kd dtfxbw. rlb uswer rlzr z awkdcb fzo biabcr
nwsf z lserkgb absagb ke rs xb zxzdvsdbv xo rlbf; xtr nwsf lserkgb
dsxgbe lb lze dsr sdgo rs nbzw zxzdvsdfbdr, xtr zges rlzr rlbo ukgg
wkeb zmzkder lkf; nsw rlbo, xbkdm kd rlbeb znnzkwe fswb nzw-ebbkdm zdv
zertrb, zguzoe csfb nswuzwv kd rkfb rs ezyb rlbfebgybe, zdv rs sxrzkd
nzystwe nwsf lkf ulsf rlbo biabcr rs awbyzkg. ntwrlbw, rlb awkdcb ke
csfabggbv rs gkyb zguzoe ukrl rlb ezfb absagb, xtr lb czd vs ubgg
ukrlstr rlb ezfb dsxgbe, xbkdm zxgb rs fzhb zdv tdfzhb rlbf vzkgo, zdv
rs mkyb sw rzhb zuzo ztrlswkro ulbd kr agbzebe lkf.

rlbwbnswb, rs fzhb rlke askdr cgbzwbw, k ezo rlzr rlb dsxgbe stmlr rs
xb gsshbv zr fzkdgo kd rus uzoe: rlzr ke rs ezo, rlbo bkrlbw elzab
rlbkw cstweb kd etcl z uzo ze xkdve rlbf bdrkwbgo rs ostw nswrtdb, sw
rlbo vs dsr. rlseb uls es xkdv rlbfebgybe, zdv zwb dsr wzazckste, stmlr
rs xb lsdstwbv zdv gsybv; rlseb uls vs dsr xkdv rlbfebgybe fzo xb vbzgr
ukrl kd rus uzoe; rlbo fzo nzkg rs vs rlke rlwstml atekggzdkfkro zdv z
dzrtwzg uzdr sn cstwzmb, kd ulkcl czeb ost stmlr rs fzhb teb sn rlbf,
beabckzggo sn rlseb uls zwb sn mssv cstdebg; zdv rlte, ulkger kd
awseabwkro ost lsdstw rlbf, kd zvybwekro ost vs dsr lzyb rs nbzw rlbf.
xtr ulbd nsw rlbkw sud zfxkrkste bdve rlbo eltd xkdvkdm rlbfebgybe, kr
ke z rshbd rlzr rlbo zwb mkykdm fswb rlstmlr rs rlbfebgybe rlzd rs ost,
zdv z awkdcb stmlr rs mtzwv zmzkder etcl, zdv rs nbzw rlbf ze kn rlbo
ubwb sabd bdbfkbe, xbczteb kd zvybwekro rlbo zguzoe lbga rs wtkd lkf.

rlbwbnswb, sdb uls xbcsfbe z awkdcb rlwstml rlb nzystw sn rlb absagb
stmlr rs hbba rlbf nwkbdvgo, zdv rlke lb czd bzekgo vs ebbkdm rlbo sdgo
zeh dsr rs xb saawbeebv xo lkf. xtr sdb uls, kd saasekrksd rs rlb
absagb, xbcsfbe z awkdcb xo rlb nzystw sn rlb dsxgbe, stmlr, zxsyb
bybworlkdm, rs ebbh rs ukd rlb absagb sybw rs lkfebgn, zdv rlke lb fzo
bzekgo vs kn lb rzhbe rlbf tdvbw lke awsrbcrksd. xbczteb fbd, ulbd rlbo
wbcbkyb mssv nwsf lkf sn ulsf rlbo ubwb biabcrkdm bykg, zwb xstdv fswb
cgsebgo rs rlbkw xbdbnzcrsw; rlte rlb absagb qtkchgo xbcsfb fswb
vbysrbv rs lkf rlzd kn lb lzv xbbd wzkebv rs rlb awkdckazgkro xo rlbkw
nzystwe; zdv rlb awkdcb czd ukd rlbkw znnbcrksde kd fzdo uzoe, xtr ze
rlbeb yzwo zccswvkdm rs rlb ckwctferzdcbe sdb czddsr mkyb nkibv wtgbe,
es k sfkr rlbf; xtr, k wbabzr, kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw z awkdcb rs lzyb rlb
absagb nwkbdvgo, srlbwukeb lb lze ds ebctwkro kd zvybwekro.

dzxke,[1] awkdcb sn rlb eazwrzde, eterzkdbv rlb zrrzch sn zgg mwbbcb,
zdv sn z ykcrswkste wsfzd zwfo, zdv zmzkder rlbf lb vbnbdvbv lke
cstdrwo zdv lke msybwdfbdr; zdv nsw rlb sybwcsfkdm sn rlke abwkg kr uze
sdgo dbcbeezwo nsw lkf rs fzhb lkfebgn ebctwb zmzkder z nbu, xtr rlke
ustgv dsr lzyb xbbd etnnkckbdr lzv rlb absagb xbbd lserkgb. zdv vs dsr
gbr zdo sdb kfatmd rlke erzrbfbdr ukrl rlb rwkrb awsybwx rlzr “lb uls
xtkgve sd rlb absagb, xtkgve sd rlb ftv,” nsw rlke ke rwtb ulbd z
awkyzrb ckrkpbd fzhbe z nstdvzrksd rlbwb, zdv abwetzvbe lkfebgn rlzr
rlb absagb ukgg nwbb lkf ulbd lb ke saawbeebv xo lke bdbfkbe sw xo rlb
fzmkerwzrbe; ulbwbkd lb ustgv nkdv lkfebgn ybwo snrbd vbcbkybv, ze
lzaabdbv rs rlb mwzcclk kd wsfb zdv rs fbeebw mkswmks eczgk[2] kd
ngswbdcb. xtr mwzdrbv z awkdcb uls lze berzxgkelbv lkfebgn ze zxsyb,
uls czd csffzdv, zdv ke z fzd sn cstwzmb, tdvkefzobv kd zvybwekro, uls
vsbe dsr nzkg kd srlbw qtzgknkczrksde, zdv uls, xo lke wbesgtrksd zdv
bdbwmo, hbbae rlb ulsgb absagb bdcstwzmbv—etcl z sdb ukgg dbybw nkdv
lkfebgn vbcbkybv kd rlbf, zdv kr ukgg xb elsud rlzr lb lze gzkv lke
nstdvzrksde ubgg.

 [1] dzxke, rowzdr sn eazwrz, csdqtbwbv xo rlb wsfzde tdvbw ngzfkdkdte
 kd 195 x.c.; hkggbv 192 x.c.

 [2] fbeebw mkswmks eczgk. rlke bybdr ke rs xb nstdv kd fzclkzybggk’e
 “ngswbdrkdb lkerswo,” xssh kkk.

rlbeb awkdckazgkrkbe zwb gkzxgb rs vzdmbw ulbd rlbo zwb azeekdm nwsf
rlb ckykg rs rlb zxesgtrb swvbw sn msybwdfbdr, nsw etcl awkdcbe bkrlbw
wtgb abwesdzggo sw rlwstml fzmkerwzrbe. kd rlb gzrrbw czeb rlbkw
msybwdfbdr ke ubzhbw zdv fswb kdebctwb, xbczteb kr wbere bdrkwbgo sd
rlb mssvukgg sn rlseb ckrkpbde uls zwb wzkebv rs rlb fzmkerwzco, zdv
uls, beabckzggo kd rwstxgbv rkfbe, czd vberwso rlb msybwdfbdr ukrl
mwbzr bzeb, bkrlbw xo kdrwkmtb sw sabd vbnkzdcb; zdv rlb awkdcb lze dsr
rlb clzdcb zfkv rtftgre rs bibwckeb zxesgtrb ztrlswkro, xbczteb rlb
ckrkpbde zdv etxjbcre, zcctersfbv rs wbcbkyb swvbwe nwsf fzmkerwzrbe,
zwb dsr sn z fkdv rs sxbo lkf zfkv rlbeb csdnteksde, zdv rlbwb ukgg
zguzoe xb kd vstxrntg rkfbe z eczwckro sn fbd ulsf lb czd rwter. nsw
etcl z awkdcb czddsr wbgo tasd ulzr lb sxebwybe kd qtkbr rkfbe, ulbd
ckrkpbde lzyb dbbv sn rlb erzrb, xbczteb rlbd bybwo sdb zmwbbe ukrl
lkf; rlbo zgg awsfkeb, zdv ulbd vbzrl ke nzw vkerzdr rlbo zgg ukel rs
vkb nsw lkf; xtr kd rwstxgbv rkfbe, ulbd rlb erzrb lze dbbv sn kre
ckrkpbde, rlbd lb nkdve xtr nbu. zdv es ftcl rlb fswb ke rlke
biabwkfbdr vzdmbwste, kdzeftcl ze kr czd sdgo xb rwkbv sdcb. rlbwbnswb
z ukeb awkdcb stmlr rs zvsar etcl z cstweb rlzr lke ckrkpbde ukgg
zguzoe kd bybwo eswr zdv hkdv sn ckwctferzdcb lzyb dbbv sn rlb erzrb
zdv sn lkf, zdv rlbd lb ukgg zguzoe nkdv rlbf nzkrlntg.




clzarbw i.
csdcbwdkdm rlb uzo kd ulkcl rlb erwbdmrl sn zgg awkdckazgkrkbe stmlr rs
xb fbzetwbv


kr ke dbcbeezwo rs csdekvbw zdsrlbw askdr kd bizfkdkdm rlb clzwzcrbw sn
rlbeb awkdckazgkrkbe: rlzr ke, ulbrlbw z awkdcb lze etcl asubw rlzr, kd
czeb sn dbbv, lb czd etaaswr lkfebgn ukrl lke sud wbestwcbe, sw ulbrlbw
lb lze zguzoe dbbv sn rlb zeekerzdcb sn srlbwe. zdv rs fzhb rlke qtkrb
cgbzw k ezo rlzr k csdekvbw rlseb uls zwb zxgb rs etaaswr rlbfebgybe xo
rlbkw sud wbestwcbe uls czd, bkrlbw xo zxtdvzdcb sn fbd sw fsdbo, wzkeb
z etnnkckbdr zwfo rs jskd xzrrgb zmzkder zdo sdb uls csfbe rs zrrzch
rlbf; zdv k csdekvbw rlseb zguzoe rs lzyb dbbv sn srlbwe uls czddsr
elsu rlbfebgybe zmzkder rlb bdbfo kd rlb nkbgv, xtr zwb nswcbv rs
vbnbdv rlbfebgybe xo elbgrbwkdm xblkdv uzgge. rlb nkwer czeb lze xbbd
vkecteebv, xtr ub ukgg eabzh sn kr zmzkd elstgv kr wbctw. kd rlb ebcsdv
czeb sdb czd ezo dsrlkdm bicbar rs bdcstwzmb etcl awkdcbe rs awsykeksd
zdv nswrkno rlbkw rsude, zdv dsr sd zdo zccstdr rs vbnbdv rlb cstdrwo.
zdv ulsbybw elzgg nswrkno lke rsud ubgg, zdv elzgg lzyb fzdzmbv rlb
srlbw csdcbwde sn lke etxjbcre kd rlb uzo erzrbv zxsyb, zdv rs xb snrbd
wbabzrbv, ukgg dbybw xb zrrzchbv ukrlstr mwbzr cztrksd, nsw fbd zwb
zguzoe zvybweb rs bdrbwawkebe ulbwb vknnkctgrkbe czd xb ebbd, zdv kr
ukgg xb ebbd dsr rs xb zd bzeo rlkdm rs zrrzch sdb uls lze lke rsud
ubgg nswrknkbv, zdv ke dsr lzrbv xo lke absagb.

rlb ckrkbe sn mbwfzdo zwb zxesgtrbgo nwbb, rlbo sud xtr gkrrgb cstdrwo
zwstdv rlbf, zdv rlbo okbgv sxbvkbdcb rs rlb bfabwsw ulbd kr etkre
rlbf, dsw vs rlbo nbzw rlke sw zdo srlbw asubw rlbo fzo lzyb dbzw rlbf,
xbczteb rlbo zwb nswrknkbv kd etcl z uzo rlzr bybwo sdb rlkdhe rlb
rzhkdm sn rlbf xo zeeztgr ustgv xb rbvkste zdv vknnkctgr, ebbkdm rlbo
lzyb awsabw vkrclbe zdv uzgge, rlbo lzyb etnnkckbdr zwrkggbwo, zdv rlbo
zguzoe hbba kd atxgkc vbasre bdstml nsw sdb obzw’e bzrkdm, vwkdhkdm,
zdv nkwkdm. zdv xbosdv rlke, rs hbba rlb absagb qtkbr zdv ukrlstr gsee
rs rlb erzrb, rlbo zguzoe lzyb rlb fbzde sn mkykdm uswh rs rlb
csfftdkro kd rlseb gzxstwe rlzr zwb rlb gknb zdv erwbdmrl sn rlb ckro,
zdv sd rlb atwetkr sn ulkcl rlb absagb zwb etaaswrbv; rlbo zges lsgv
fkgkrzwo bibwckebe kd wbatrb, zdv fswbsybw lzyb fzdo swvkdzdcbe rs
talsgv rlbf.

rlbwbnswb, z awkdcb uls lze z erwsdm ckro, zdv lzv dsr fzvb lkfebgn
svkste, ukgg dsr xb zrrzchbv, sw kn zdo sdb elstgv zrrzch lb ukgg sdgo
xb vwkybd snn ukrl vkemwzcb; zmzkd, xbczteb rlzr rlb znnzkwe sn rlke
uswgv zwb es clzdmbzxgb, kr ke zgfser kfaseekxgb rs hbba zd zwfo z
ulsgb obzw kd rlb nkbgv ukrlstr xbkdm kdrbwnbwbv ukrl. zdv ulsbybw
elstgv wbago: kn rlb absagb lzyb awsabwro strekvb rlb ckro, zdv ebb kr
xtwdr, rlbo ukgg dsr wbfzkd azrkbdr, zdv rlb gsdm ekbmb zdv
ebgn-kdrbwber ukgg fzhb rlbf nswmbr rlbkw awkdcb; rs rlke k zdeubw rlzr
z asubwntg zdv cstwzmbste awkdcb ukgg sybwcsfb zgg etcl vknnkctgrkbe xo
mkykdm zr sdb rkfb lsab rs lke etxjbcre rlzr rlb bykg ukgg dsr xb nsw
gsdm, zr zdsrlbw rkfb nbzw sn rlb cwtbgro sn rlb bdbfo, rlbd awbebwykdm
lkfebgn zvwskrgo nwsf rlseb etxjbcre uls ebbf rs lkf rs xb rss xsgv.

ntwrlbw, rlb bdbfo ustgv dzrtwzggo sd lke zwwkyzg zr sdcb xtwd zdv wtkd
rlb cstdrwo zr rlb rkfb ulbd rlb eakwkre sn rlb absagb zwb erkgg lsr
zdv wbzvo nsw rlb vbnbdcb; zdv, rlbwbnswb, es ftcl rlb gbee stmlr rlb
awkdcb rs lbekrzrb; xbczteb znrbw z rkfb, ulbd eakwkre lzyb cssgbv, rlb
vzfzmb ke zgwbzvo vsdb, rlb kgge zwb kdctwwbv, zdv rlbwb ke ds gsdmbw
zdo wbfbvo; zdv rlbwbnswb rlbo zwb es ftcl rlb fswb wbzvo rs tdkrb ukrl
rlbkw awkdcb, lb zaabzwkdm rs xb tdvbw sxgkmzrksde rs rlbf dsu rlzr
rlbkw lstebe lzyb xbbd xtwdr zdv rlbkw aseebeeksde wtkdbv kd lke
vbnbdcb. nsw kr ke rlb dzrtwb sn fbd rs xb xstdv xo rlb xbdbnkre rlbo
csdnbw ze ftcl ze xo rlseb rlbo wbcbkyb. rlbwbnswb, kn bybworlkdm ke
ubgg csdekvbwbv, kr ukgg dsr xb vknnkctgr nsw z ukeb awkdcb rs hbba rlb
fkdve sn lke ckrkpbde erbzvnzer nwsf nkwer rs gzer, ulbd lb vsbe dsr
nzkg rs etaaswr zdv vbnbdv rlbf.




clzarbw ik.
csdcbwdkdm bccgbekzerkczg awkdckazgkrkbe


kr sdgo wbfzkde dsu rs eabzh sn bccgbekzerkczg awkdckazgkrkbe, rstclkdm
ulkcl zgg vknnkctgrkbe zwb awksw rs mbrrkdm aseebeeksd, xbczteb rlbo
zwb zcqtkwbv bkrlbw xo czazckro sw mssv nswrtdb, zdv rlbo czd xb lbgv
ukrlstr bkrlbw; nsw rlbo zwb eterzkdbv xo rlb zdckbdr swvkdzdcbe sn
wbgkmksd, ulkcl zwb es zgg-asubwntg, zdv sn etcl z clzwzcrbw rlzr rlb
awkdckazgkrkbe fzo xb lbgv ds fzrrbw lsu rlbkw awkdcbe xblzyb zdv gkyb.
rlbeb awkdcbe zgsdb lzyb erzrbe zdv vs dsr vbnbdv rlbf; zdv rlbo lzyb
etxjbcre zdv vs dsr wtgb rlbf; zdv rlb erzrbe, zgrlstml tdmtzwvbv, zwb
dsr rzhbd nwsf rlbf, zdv rlb etxjbcre, zgrlstml dsr wtgbv, vs dsr czwb,
zdv rlbo lzyb dbkrlbw rlb vbekwb dsw rlb zxkgkro rs zgkbdzrb
rlbfebgybe. etcl awkdckazgkrkbe sdgo zwb ebctwb zdv lzaao. xtr xbkdm
talbgv xo asubwe, rs ulkcl rlb ltfzd fkdv czddsr wbzcl, k elzgg eabzh
ds fswb sn rlbf, xbczteb, xbkdm bizgrbv zdv fzkdrzkdbv xo msv, kr ustgv
xb rlb zcr sn z awbetfartste zdv wzel fzd rs vkectee rlbf.

dbybwrlbgbee, kn zdo sdb elstgv zeh sn fb lsu csfbe kr rlzr rlb cltwcl
lze zrrzkdbv etcl mwbzrdbee kd rbfaswzg asubw, ebbkdm rlzr nwsf
zgbizdvbw xzchuzwve rlb krzgkzd asrbdrzrbe (dsr sdgo rlseb uls lzyb
xbbd czggbv asrbdrzrbe, xtr bybwo xzwsd zdv gswv, rlstml rlb efzggber)
lzyb yzgtbv rlb rbfaswzg asubw ybwo egkmlrgo—obr dsu z hkdm sn nwzdcb
rwbfxgbe xbnswb kr, zdv kr lze xbbd zxgb rs vwkyb lkf nwsf krzgo, zdv
rs wtkd rlb ybdbrkzde—zgrlstml rlke fzo xb ybwo fzdknber, kr vsbe dsr
zaabzw rs fb etabwngtste rs wbczgg kr kd esfb fbzetwb rs fbfswo.

xbnswb clzwgbe, hkdm sn nwzdcb, azeebv kdrs krzgo,[1] rlke cstdrwo uze
tdvbw rlb vsfkdksd sn rlb asab, rlb ybdbrkzde, rlb hkdm sn dzagbe, rlb
vthb sn fkgzd, zdv rlb ngswbdrkdbe. rlbeb asrbdrzrbe lzv rus awkdckazg
zdikbrkbe: rlb sdb, rlzr ds nswbkmdbw elstgv bdrbw krzgo tdvbw zwfe;
rlb srlbw, rlzr dsdb sn rlbfebgybe elstgv ebkpb fswb rbwwkrswo. rlseb
zxstr ulsf rlbwb uze rlb fser zdikbro ubwb rlb asab zdv rlb ybdbrkzde.
rs wberwzkd rlb ybdbrkzde rlb tdksd sn zgg rlb srlbwe uze dbcbeezwo, ze
kr uze nsw rlb vbnbdcb sn nbwwzwz; zdv rs hbba vsud rlb asab rlbo fzvb
teb sn rlb xzwsde sn wsfb, uls, xbkdm vkykvbv kdrs rus nzcrksde, swekdk
zdv csgsddbek, lzv zguzoe z awbrbir nsw vkeswvbw, zdv, erzdvkdm ukrl
zwfe kd rlbkw lzdve tdvbw rlb bobe sn rlb asdrknn, hbar rlb asdrknkczrb
ubzh zdv asubwgbee. zdv zgrlstml rlbwb fkmlr zwkeb esfbrkfbe z
cstwzmbste asab, etcl ze ekirte, obr dbkrlbw nswrtdb dsw ukevsf cstgv
wkv lkf sn rlbeb zddsozdcbe. zdv rlb elswr gknb sn z asab ke zges z
czteb sn ubzhdbee; nsw kd rlb rbd obzwe, ulkcl ke rlb zybwzmb gknb sn z
asab, lb czd ukrl vknnkctgro gsubw sdb sn rlb nzcrksde; zdv kn, es rs
eabzh, sdb absagb elstgv zgfser vberwso rlb csgsddbek, zdsrlbw ustgv
zwkeb lserkgb rs rlb swekdk, uls ustgv etaaswr rlbkw saasdbdre, zdv obr
ustgv dsr lzyb rkfb rs wtkd rlb swekdk. rlke uze rlb wbzesd ulo rlb
rbfaswzg asubwe sn rlb asab ubwb gkrrgb berbbfbv kd krzgo.

 [1] clzwgbe ykkk kdyzvbv krzgo kd 1494.

zgbizdvbw rlb ekirl zwseb znrbwuzwve, uls sn zgg rlb asdrknne rlzr lzyb
bybw xbbd elsubv lsu z asab ukrl xsrl fsdbo zdv zwfe uze zxgb rs
awbyzkg; zdv rlwstml rlb kderwtfbdrzgkro sn rlb vthb yzgbdrkds, zdv xo
wbzesd sn rlb bdrwo sn rlb nwbdcl, lb xwstmlr zxstr zgg rlseb rlkdme
ulkcl k lzyb vkecteebv zxsyb kd rlb zcrksde sn rlb vthb. zdv zgrlstml
lke kdrbdrksd uze dsr rs zmmwzdvkpb rlb cltwcl, xtr rlb vthb,
dbybwrlbgbee, ulzr lb vkv csdrwkxtrbv rs rlb mwbzrdbee sn rlb cltwcl,
ulkcl, znrbw lke vbzrl zdv rlb wtkd sn rlb vthb, xbczfb rlb lbkw rs zgg
lke gzxstwe.

asab jtgkte czfb znrbwuzwve zdv nstdv rlb cltwcl erwsdm, aseebeekdm zgg
rlb wsfzmdz, rlb xzwsde sn wsfb wbvtcbv rs kfasrbdcb, zdv, rlwstml rlb
clzerkebfbdre sn zgbizdvbw, rlb nzcrksde ukabv str; lb zges nstdv rlb
uzo sabd rs zcctftgzrb fsdbo kd z fzddbw etcl ze lzv dbybw xbbd
awzcrkebv xbnswb zgbizdvbw’e rkfb. etcl rlkdme jtgkte dsr sdgo
nsggsubv, xtr kfawsybv tasd, zdv lb kdrbdvbv rs mzkd xsgsmdz, rs wtkd
rlb ybdbrkzde, zdv rs vwkyb rlb nwbdcl str sn krzgo. zgg sn rlbeb
bdrbwawkebe awseabwbv ukrl lkf, zdv es ftcl rlb fswb rs lke cwbvkr,
kdzeftcl ze lb vkv bybworlkdm rs erwbdmrlbd rlb cltwcl zdv dsr zdo
awkyzrb abwesd. lb hbar zges rlb swekdk zdv csgsddbek nzcrksde ukrlkd
rlb xstdve kd ulkcl lb nstdv rlbf; zdv zgrlstml rlbwb uze zfsdm rlbf
esfb fkdv rs fzhb vkertwxzdcb, dbybwrlbgbee lb lbgv rus rlkdme nkwf:
rlb sdb, rlb mwbzrdbee sn rlb cltwcl, ukrl ulkcl lb rbwwknkbv rlbf; zdv
rlb srlbw, dsr zggsukdm rlbf rs lzyb rlbkw sud czwvkdzge, uls cztebv
rlb vkeswvbwe zfsdm rlbf. nsw ulbdbybw rlbeb nzcrksde lzyb rlbkw
czwvkdzge rlbo vs dsr wbfzkd qtkbr nsw gsdm, xbczteb czwvkdzge nserbw
rlb nzcrksde kd wsfb zdv str sn kr, zdv rlb xzwsde zwb csfabggbv rs
etaaswr rlbf, zdv rlte nwsf rlb zfxkrksde sn awbgzrbe zwkeb vkeswvbwe
zdv rtftgre zfsdm rlb xzwsde. nsw rlbeb wbzesde lke lsgkdbee asab
gbs[2] nstdv rlb asdrknkczrb fser asubwntg, zdv kr ke rs xb lsabv rlzr,
kn srlbwe fzvb kr mwbzr kd zwfe, lb ukgg fzhb kr erkgg mwbzrbw zdv fswb
ybdbwzrbv xo lke mssvdbee zdv kdnkdkrb srlbw ykwrtbe.

 [2] asab gbs i uze rlb czwvkdzg vb’ fbvkck.




clzarbw ikk.
lsu fzdo hkdve sn esgvkbwo rlbwb zwb, zdv csdcbwdkdm fbwcbdzwkbe


lzykdm vkecstwebv azwrkctgzwgo sd rlb clzwzcrbwkerkce sn etcl
awkdckazgkrkbe ze kd rlb xbmkddkdm k awsasebv rs vkectee, zdv lzykdm
csdekvbwbv kd esfb vbmwbb rlb cztebe sn rlbwb xbkdm mssv sw xzv, zdv
lzykdm elsud rlb fbrlsve xo ulkcl fzdo lzyb estmlr rs zcqtkwb rlbf zdv
rs lsgv rlbf, kr dsu wbfzkde nsw fb rs vkectee mbdbwzggo rlb fbzde sn
snnbdcb zdv vbnbdcb ulkcl xbgsdm rs bzcl sn rlbf.

ub lzyb ebbd zxsyb lsu dbcbeezwo kr ke nsw z awkdcb rs lzyb lke
nstdvzrksde ubgg gzkv, srlbwukeb kr nsggsue sn dbcbeekro lb ukgg ms rs
wtkd. rlb clkbn nstdvzrksde sn zgg erzrbe, dbu ze ubgg ze sgv sw
csfasekrb, zwb mssv gzue zdv mssv zwfe; zdv ze rlbwb czddsr xb mssv
gzue ulbwb rlb erzrb ke dsr ubgg zwfbv, kr nsggsue rlzr ulbwb rlbo zwb
ubgg zwfbv rlbo lzyb mssv gzue. k elzgg gbzyb rlb gzue str sn rlb
vkecteeksd zdv elzgg eabzh sn rlb zwfe.

k ezo, rlbwbnswb, rlzr rlb zwfe ukrl ulkcl z awkdcb vbnbdve lke erzrb
zwb bkrlbw lke sud, sw rlbo zwb fbwcbdzwkbe, ztikgkzwkbe, sw fkibv.
fbwcbdzwkbe zdv ztikgkzwkbe zwb tebgbee zdv vzdmbwste; zdv kn sdb lsgve
lke erzrb xzebv sd rlbeb zwfe, lb ukgg erzdv dbkrlbw nkwf dsw eznb; nsw
rlbo zwb vketdkrbv, zfxkrkste, zdv ukrlstr vkeckagkdb, tdnzkrlntg,
yzgkzdr xbnswb nwkbdve, csuzwvgo xbnswb bdbfkbe; rlbo lzyb dbkrlbw rlb
nbzw sn msv dsw nkvbgkro rs fbd, zdv vberwtcrksd ke vbnbwwbv sdgo es
gsdm ze rlb zrrzch ke; nsw kd abzcb sdb ke wsxxbv xo rlbf, zdv kd uzw
xo rlb bdbfo. rlb nzcr ke, rlbo lzyb ds srlbw zrrwzcrksd sw wbzesd nsw
hbbakdm rlb nkbgv rlzd z rwkngb sn erkabdv, ulkcl ke dsr etnnkckbdr rs
fzhb rlbf ukggkdm rs vkb nsw ost. rlbo zwb wbzvo bdstml rs xb ostw
esgvkbwe ulkger ost vs dsr fzhb uzw, xtr kn uzw csfbe rlbo rzhb
rlbfebgybe snn sw wtd nwsf rlb nsb; ulkcl k elstgv lzyb gkrrgb rwstxgb
rs awsyb, nsw rlb wtkd sn krzgo lze xbbd cztebv xo dsrlkdm bgeb rlzd xo
wberkdm zgg lbw lsabe nsw fzdo obzwe sd fbwcbdzwkbe, zdv zgrlstml rlbo
nswfbwgo fzvb esfb vkeagzo zdv zaabzwbv yzgkzdr zfsdmer rlbfebgybe, obr
ulbd rlb nswbkmdbwe czfb rlbo elsubv ulzr rlbo ubwb. rlte kr uze rlzr
clzwgbe, hkdm sn nwzdcb, uze zggsubv rs ebkpb krzgo ukrl clzgh kd
lzdv;[1] zdv lb uls rsgv te rlzr stw ekde ubwb rlb czteb sn kr rsgv rlb
rwtrl, xtr rlbo ubwb dsr rlb ekde lb kfzmkdbv, xtr rlseb ulkcl k lzyb
wbgzrbv. zdv ze rlbo ubwb rlb ekde sn awkdcbe, kr ke rlb awkdcbe uls
lzyb zges etnnbwbv rlb abdzgro.

 [1] “ukrl clzgh kd lzdv,” “csg mbees.” rlke ke sdb sn rlb _xsde fsre_
 sn zgbizdvbw yk, zdv wbnbwe rs rlb bzeb ukrl ulkcl clzwgbe ykkk ebkpbv
 krzgo, kfagokdm rlzr kr uze sdgo dbcbeezwo nsw lkf rs ebdv lke
 qtzwrbwfzerbwe rs clzgh ta rlb xkggbre nsw lke esgvkbwe rs csdqtbw rlb
 cstdrwo. _cn_. “rlb lkerswo sn lbdwo ykk,” xo gswv xzcsd: “hkdm
 clzwgbe lzv csdqtbwbv rlb wbzgf sn dzagbe, zdv gser kr zmzkd, kd z
 hkdv sn z nbgkckro sn z vwbzf. lb azeebv rlb ulsgb gbdmrl sn krzgo
 ukrlstr wbekerzdcb: es rlzr kr uze rwtb ulzr asab zgbizdvbw uze usdr
 rs ezo: rlzr rlb nwbdclfbd czfb kdrs krzgo ukrl clzgh kd rlbkw lzdve,
 rs fzwh ta rlbkw gsvmkdme, wzrlbw rlzd ukrl euswve rs nkmlr.”

k ukel rs vbfsderwzrb ntwrlbw rlb kdnbgkckro sn rlbeb zwfe. rlb
fbwcbdzwo czarzkde zwb bkrlbw czazxgb fbd sw rlbo zwb dsr; kn rlbo zwb,
ost czddsr rwter rlbf, xbczteb rlbo zguzoe zeakwb rs rlbkw sud
mwbzrdbee, bkrlbw xo saawbeekdm ost, uls zwb rlbkw fzerbw, sw srlbwe
csdrwzwo rs ostw kdrbdrksde; xtr kn rlb czarzkd ke dsr ehkgntg, ost zwb
wtkdbv kd rlb tetzg uzo.

zdv kn kr xb twmbv rlzr ulsbybw ke zwfbv ukgg zcr kd rlb ezfb uzo,
ulbrlbw fbwcbdzwo sw dsr, k wbago rlzr ulbd zwfe lzyb rs xb wbeswrbv
rs, bkrlbw xo z awkdcb sw z wbatxgkc, rlbd rlb awkdcb stmlr rs ms kd
abwesd zdv abwnswf rlb vtro sn z czarzkd; rlb wbatxgkc lze rs ebdv kre
ckrkpbde, zdv ulbd sdb ke ebdr uls vsbe dsr rtwd str ezrkenzcrswkgo, kr
stmlr rs wbczgg lkf, zdv ulbd sdb ke uswrlo, rs lsgv lkf xo rlb gzue es
rlzr lb vsbe dsr gbzyb rlb csffzdv. zdv biabwkbdcb lze elsud awkdcbe
zdv wbatxgkce, ekdmgb-lzdvbv, fzhkdm rlb mwbzrber awsmwbee, zdv
fbwcbdzwkbe vskdm dsrlkdm bicbar vzfzmb; zdv kr ke fswb vknnkctgr rs
xwkdm z wbatxgkc, zwfbv ukrl kre sud zwfe, tdvbw rlb euzo sn sdb sn kre
ckrkpbde rlzd kr ke rs xwkdm sdb zwfbv ukrl nswbkmd zwfe. wsfb zdv
eazwrz erssv nsw fzdo zmbe zwfbv zdv nwbb. rlb eukrpbwe zwb csfagbrbgo
zwfbv zdv qtkrb nwbb.

sn zdckbdr fbwcbdzwkbe, nsw bizfagb, rlbwb zwb rlb czwrlzmkdkzde, uls
ubwb saawbeebv xo rlbkw fbwcbdzwo esgvkbwe znrbw rlb nkwer uzw ukrl rlb
wsfzde, zgrlstml rlb czwrlzmkdkzde lzv rlbkw sud ckrkpbde nsw czarzkde.
znrbw rlb vbzrl sn bazfkdsdvze, alkgka sn fzcbvsd uze fzvb czarzkd sn
rlbkw esgvkbwe xo rlb rlbxzde, zdv znrbw ykcrswo lb rssh zuzo rlbkw
gkxbwro.

vthb nkgkaas xbkdm vbzv, rlb fkgzdbeb bdgkerbv nwzdcbecs enswpz zmzkder
rlb ybdbrkzde, zdv lb, lzykdm sybwcsfb rlb bdbfo zr czwzyzmmks,[2]
zggkbv lkfebgn ukrl rlbf rs cwtel rlb fkgzdbeb, lke fzerbwe. lke
nzrlbw, enswpz, lzykdm xbbd bdmzmbv xo qtbbd jslzddz[3] sn dzagbe, gbnr
lbw tdawsrbcrbv, es rlzr elb uze nswcbv rs rlwsu lbwebgn kdrs rlb zwfe
sn rlb hkdm sn zwzmsd, kd swvbw rs ezyb lbw hkdmvsf. zdv kn rlb
ybdbrkzde zdv ngswbdrkdbe nswfbwgo birbdvbv rlbkw vsfkdksde xo rlbeb
zwfe, zdv obr rlbkw czarzkde vkv dsr fzhb rlbfebgybe awkdcbe, xtr lzyb
vbnbdvbv rlbf, k wbago rlzr rlb ngswbdrkdbe kd rlke czeb lzyb xbbd
nzystwbv xo clzdcb, nsw sn rlb zxgb czarzkde, sn ulsf rlbo fkmlr lzyb
erssv kd nbzw, esfb lzyb dsr csdqtbwbv, esfb lzyb xbbd saasebv, zdv
srlbwe lzyb rtwdbv rlbkw zfxkrksde bgebulbwb. sdb uls vkv dsr csdqtbw
uze mksyzddk zctrs,[4] zdv ekdcb lb vkv dsr csdqtbw lke nkvbgkro czddsr
xb awsybv; xtr bybwo sdb ukgg zchdsugbvmb rlzr, lzv lb csdqtbwbv, rlb
ngswbdrkdbe ustgv lzyb erssv zr lke vkecwbrksd. enswpz lzv rlb
xwzccbeclk zguzoe zmzkder lkf, es rlbo uzrclbv bzcl srlbw. nwzdcbecs
rtwdbv lke zfxkrksd rs gsfxzwvo; xwzccks zmzkder rlb cltwcl zdv rlb
hkdmvsf sn dzagbe. xtr gbr te csfb rs rlzr ulkcl lzaabdbv z elswr ulkgb
zms. rlb ngswbdrkdbe zaaskdrbv ze rlbkw czarzkd azmsgs ykrbggk, z fser
awtvbdr fzd, uls nwsf z awkyzrb asekrksd lzv wkebd rs rlb mwbzrber
wbdsud. kn rlke fzd lzv rzhbd akez, dsxsvo czd vbdo rlzr kr ustgv lzyb
xbbd awsabw nsw rlb ngswbdrkdbe rs hbba kd ukrl lkf, nsw kn lb xbczfb
rlb esgvkbw sn rlbkw bdbfkbe rlbo lzv ds fbzde sn wbekerkdm, zdv kn
rlbo lbgv rs lkf rlbo fter sxbo lkf. rlb ybdbrkzde, kn rlbkw
zclkbybfbdre zwb csdekvbwbv, ukgg xb ebbd rs lzyb zcrbv eznbgo zdv
mgswkstego es gsdm ze rlbo ebdr rs uzw rlbkw sud fbd, ulbd ukrl zwfbv
mbdrgbfbd zdv agbxkzde rlbo vkv yzgkzdrgo. rlke uze xbnswb rlbo rtwdbv
rs bdrbwawkebe sd gzdv, xtr ulbd rlbo xbmzd rs nkmlr sd gzdv rlbo
nswessh rlke ykwrtb zdv nsggsubv rlb ctersf sn krzgo. zdv kd rlb
xbmkddkdm sn rlbkw biazdeksd sd gzdv, rlwstml dsr lzykdm ftcl
rbwwkrswo, zdv xbczteb sn rlbkw mwbzr wbatrzrksd, rlbo lzv dsr ftcl rs
nbzw nwsf rlbkw czarzkde; xtr ulbd rlbo biazdvbv, ze tdvbw
czwfkmdtsgz,[5] rlbo lzv z rzerb sn rlke fkerzhb; nsw, lzykdm nstdv lkf
z fser yzgkzdr fzd (rlbo xbzr rlb vthb sn fkgzd tdvbw lke gbzvbwelka),
zdv, sd rlb srlbw lzdv, hdsukdm lsu gthbuzwf lb uze kd rlb uzw, rlbo
nbzwbv rlbo ustgv ds gsdmbw csdqtbw tdvbw lkf, zdv nsw rlke wbzesd rlbo
ubwb dsr ukggkdm, dsw ubwb rlbo zxgb, rs gbr lkf ms; zdv es, dsr rs
gseb zmzkd rlzr ulkcl rlbo lzv zcqtkwbv, rlbo ubwb csfabggbv, kd swvbw
rs ebctwb rlbfebgybe, rs ftwvbw lkf. rlbo lzv znrbwuzwve nsw rlbkw
czarzkde xzwrsgsfbs vz xbwmzfs, wsxbwrs vz ezd ebybwkds, rlb cstdr sn
akrkmgkzds,[6] zdv rlb gkhb, tdvbw ulsf rlbo lzv rs vwbzv gsee zdv dsr
mzkd, ze lzaabdbv znrbwuzwve zr yzkgz,[7] ulbwb kd sdb xzrrgb rlbo gser
rlzr ulkcl kd bkmlr ltdvwbv obzwe rlbo lzv zcqtkwbv ukrl es ftcl
rwstxgb. xbczteb nwsf etcl zwfe csdqtbere csfb xtr egsugo, gsdm vbgzobv
zdv kdcsdekvbwzxgb, xtr rlb gseebe etvvbd zdv aswrbdrste.

 [2] xzrrgb sn czwzyzmmks, 15rl ebarbfxbw 1448.

 [3] jslzddz kk sn dzagbe, rlb ukvsu sn gzvkegzs, hkdm sn dzagbe.

 [4] mksyzddk zctrs. zd bdmgkel hdkmlr ulseb dzfb uze ekw jsld
 lzuhussv. lb nstmlr kd rlb bdmgkel uzwe kd nwzdcb, zdv uze hdkmlrbv xo
 bvuzwv kkk; znrbwuzwve lb csggbcrbv z xsvo sn rwssae zdv ubdr kdrs
 krzgo. rlbeb xbczfb rlb nzfste “ulkrb csfazdo.” lb rssh azwr kd fzdo
 uzwe, zdv vkbv kd ngswbdcb kd 1394. lb uze xswd zxstr 1320 zr ekxgb
 lbvkdmlzf, z ykggzmb kd beebi. lb fzwwkbv vsfdkz, z vztmlrbw sn
 xbwdzxs ykecsdrk.

 [5] czwfkmdtsgz. nwzdcbecs xteesdb, xswd zr czwfzmdsgz zxstr 1390,
 bibctrbv zr ybdkcb, 5rl fzo 1432.

 [6] xzwrsgsfbs csggbsdk sn xbwmzfs; vkbv 1457. wsxbwrs sn ezd
 ebybwkds; vkbv nkmlrkdm nsw ybdkcb zmzkder ekmkeftdv, vthb sn zterwkz,
 kd 1487. “awkfs czakrzds kd krzgkz.”—fzclkzybggk. cstdr sn akrkmgkzds;
 dkcsgs swekdk, xswd 1442, vkbv 1510.

 [7] xzrrgb sn yzkgz kd 1509.

zdv ze ukrl rlbeb bizfagbe k lzyb wbzclbv krzgo, ulkcl lze xbbd wtgbv
nsw fzdo obzwe xo fbwcbdzwkbe, k ukel rs vkectee rlbf fswb ebwkstego,
kd swvbw rlzr, lzykdm ebbd rlbkw wkeb zdv awsmwbee, sdb fzo xb xbrrbw
awbazwbv rs cstdrbwzcr rlbf. ost fter tdvbwerzdv rlzr rlb bfakwb lze
wbcbdrgo csfb rs xb wbatvkzrbv kd krzgo, rlzr rlb asab lze zcqtkwbv
fswb rbfaswzg asubw, zdv rlzr krzgo lze xbbd vkykvbv ta kdrs fswb
erzrbe, nsw rlb wbzesd rlzr fzdo sn rlb mwbzr ckrkbe rssh ta zwfe
zmzkder rlbkw dsxgbe, uls, nswfbwgo nzystwbv xo rlb bfabwsw, ubwb
saawbeekdm rlbf, ulkger rlb cltwcl uze nzystwkdm rlbf es ze rs mzkd
ztrlswkro kd rbfaswzg asubw: kd fzdo srlbwe rlbkw ckrkpbde xbczfb
awkdcbe. nwsf rlke kr czfb rs azee rlzr krzgo nbgg azwrgo kdrs rlb
lzdve sn rlb cltwcl zdv sn wbatxgkce, zdv, rlb cltwcl csdekerkdm sn
awkbere zdv rlb wbatxgkc sn ckrkpbde tdzcctersfbv rs zwfe, xsrl
csffbdcbv rs bdgker nswbkmdbwe.

rlb nkwer uls mzyb wbdsud rs rlke esgvkbwo uze zgxbwkms vz csdks,[8]
rlb wsfzmdkzd. nwsf rlb eclssg sn rlke fzd eawzdm, zfsdm srlbwe,
xwzccks zdv enswpz, uls kd rlbkw rkfb ubwb rlb zwxkrbwe sn krzgo. znrbw
rlbeb czfb zgg rlb srlbw czarzkde uls rkgg dsu lzyb vkwbcrbv rlb zwfe
sn krzgo; zdv rlb bdv sn zgg rlbkw yzgstw lze xbbd, rlzr elb lze xbbd
sybwwtd xo clzwgbe, wsxxbv xo gstke, wzyzmbv xo nbwvkdzdv, zdv kdetgrbv
xo rlb eukrpbwe. rlb awkdckagb rlzr lze mtkvbv rlbf lze xbbd, nkwer, rs
gsubw rlb cwbvkr sn kdnzdrwo es rlzr rlbo fkmlr kdcwbzeb rlbkw sud.
rlbo vkv rlke xbczteb, etxekerkdm sd rlbkw azo zdv ukrlstr rbwwkrswo,
rlbo ubwb tdzxgb rs etaaswr fzdo esgvkbwe, zdv z nbu kdnzdrwo vkv dsr
mkyb rlbf zdo ztrlswkro; es rlbo ubwb gbv rs bfagso czyzgwo, ukrl z
fsvbwzrb nswcb sn ulkcl rlbo ubwb fzkdrzkdbv zdv lsdstwbv; zdv znnzkwe
ubwb xwstmlr rs etcl z azee rlzr, kd zd zwfo sn rubdro rlstezdv
esgvkbwe, rlbwb ubwb dsr rs xb nstdv rus rlstezdv nssr esgvkbwe. rlbo
lzv, xbekvbe rlke, tebv bybwo zwr rs gbeebd nzrkmtb zdv vzdmbw rs
rlbfebgybe zdv rlbkw esgvkbwe, dsr hkggkdm kd rlb nwzo, xtr rzhkdm
awkesdbwe zdv gkxbwzrkdm ukrlstr wzdesf. rlbo vkv dsr zrrzch rsude zr
dkmlr, dsw vkv rlb mzwwkesde sn rlb rsude zrrzch bdczfafbdre zr dkmlr;
rlbo vkv dsr etwwstdv rlb czfa bkrlbw ukrl erschzvb sw vkrcl, dsw vkv
rlbo czfazkmd kd rlb ukdrbw. zgg rlbeb rlkdme ubwb abwfkrrbv xo rlbkw
fkgkrzwo wtgbe, zdv vbykebv xo rlbf rs zyskv, ze k lzyb ezkv, xsrl
nzrkmtb zdv vzdmbwe; rlte rlbo lzyb xwstmlr krzgo rs egzybwo zdv
csdrbfar.

 [8] zgxbwkms vz csdks. zgxbwkcs vz xzwxkzds, cstdr sn ctdks kd
 wsfzmdz. lb uze rlb gbzvbw sn rlb nzfste “csfazdo sn er mbswmb,”
 csfasebv bdrkwbgo sn krzgkzd esgvkbwe. lb vkbv kd 1409.




clzarbw ikkk.
csdcbwdkdm ztikgkzwkbe, fkibv esgvkbwo, zdv sdb’e sud


ztikgkzwkbe, ulkcl zwb rlb srlbw tebgbee zwf, zwb bfagsobv ulbd z
awkdcb ke czggbv kd ukrl lke nswcbe rs zkv zdv vbnbdv, ze uze vsdb xo
asab jtgkte kd rlb fser wbcbdr rkfbe; nsw lb, lzykdm, kd rlb bdrbwawkeb
zmzkder nbwwzwz, lzv assw awssn sn lke fbwcbdzwkbe, rtwdbv rs
ztikgkzwkbe, zdv erkatgzrbv ukrl nbwvkdzdv, hkdm sn eazkd,[1] nsw lke
zeekerzdcb ukrl fbd zdv zwfe. rlbeb zwfe fzo xb tebntg zdv mssv kd
rlbfebgybe, xtr nsw lkf uls czgge rlbf kd rlbo zwb zguzoe
vkezvyzdrzmbste; nsw gsekdm, sdb ke tdvsdb, zdv ukddkdm, sdb ke rlbkw
czarkyb.

 [1] nbwvkdzdv y (n. kk sn zwzmsd zdv ekckgo, n. kkk sn dzagbe),
 etwdzfbv “rlb czrlsgkc,” xswd 1452, vkbv 1516.

zdv zgrlstml zdckbdr lkerswkbe fzo xb ntgg sn bizfagbe, k vs dsr ukel
rs gbzyb rlke wbcbdr sdb sn asab jtgkte rlb ebcsdv, rlb abwkg sn ulkcl
czddsr nzkg rs xb abwcbkybv; nsw lb, ukelkdm rs mbr nbwwzwz, rlwbu
lkfebgn bdrkwbgo kdrs rlb lzdve sn rlb nswbkmdbw. xtr lke mssv nswrtdb
xwstmlr zxstr z rlkwv bybdr, es rlzr lb vkv dsr wbza rlb nwtkr sn lke
wzel clskcb; xbczteb, lzykdm lke ztikgkzwkbe wstrbv zr wzybddz, zdv rlb
eukrpbwe lzykdm wkebd zdv vwkybd str rlb csdqtbwswe (zmzkder zgg
biabcrzrksd, xsrl lke zdv srlbwe), kr es czfb rs azee rlzr lb vkv dsr
xbcsfb awkesdbw rs lke bdbfkbe, rlbo lzykdm ngbv, dsw rs lke
ztikgkzwkbe, lb lzykdm csdqtbwbv xo srlbw zwfe rlzd rlbkwe.

rlb ngswbdrkdbe, xbkdm bdrkwbgo ukrlstr zwfe, ebdr rbd rlstezdv
nwbdclfbd rs rzhb akez, ulbwbxo rlbo wzd fswb vzdmbw rlzd zr zdo srlbw
rkfb sn rlbkw rwstxgbe.

rlb bfabwsw sn csderzdrkdsagb,[2] rs saaseb lke dbkmlxstwe, ebdr rbd
rlstezdv rtwhe kdrs mwbbcb, uls, sd rlb uzw xbkdm nkdkelbv, ubwb dsr
ukggkdm rs qtkr; rlke uze rlb xbmkddkdm sn rlb ebwykrtvb sn mwbbcb rs
rlb kdnkvbge.

 [2] jszddbe czdrzctpbdte, xswd 1300, vkbv 1383.

rlbwbnswb, gbr lkf uls lze ds vbekwb rs csdqtbw fzhb teb sn rlbeb zwfe,
nsw rlbo zwb ftcl fswb lzpzwvste rlzd fbwcbdzwkbe, xbczteb ukrl rlbf
rlb wtkd ke wbzvo fzvb; rlbo zwb zgg tdkrbv, zgg okbgv sxbvkbdcb rs
srlbwe; xtr ukrl fbwcbdzwkbe, ulbd rlbo lzyb csdqtbwbv, fswb rkfb zdv
xbrrbw saaswrtdkrkbe zwb dbbvbv rs kdjtwb ost; rlbo zwb dsr zgg sn sdb
csfftdkro, rlbo zwb nstdv zdv azkv xo ost, zdv z rlkwv azwro, ulkcl ost
lzyb fzvb rlbkw lbzv, ke dsr zxgb zgg zr sdcb rs zeetfb bdstml
ztrlswkro rs kdjtwb ost. kd csdcgteksd, kd fbwcbdzwkbe vzerzwvo ke fser
vzdmbwste; kd ztikgkzwkbe, yzgstw. rlb ukeb awkdcb, rlbwbnswb, lze
zguzoe zyskvbv rlbeb zwfe zdv rtwdbv rs lke sud; zdv lze xbbd ukggkdm
wzrlbw rs gseb ukrl rlbf rlzd rs csdqtbw ukrl rlb srlbwe, dsr vbbfkdm
rlzr z wbzg ykcrswo ulkcl ke mzkdbv ukrl rlb zwfe sn srlbwe.

k elzgg dbybw lbekrzrb rs ckrb cbezwb xswmkz zdv lke zcrksde. rlke vthb
bdrbwbv rlb wsfzmdz ukrl ztikgkzwkbe, rzhkdm rlbwb sdgo nwbdcl
esgvkbwe, zdv ukrl rlbf lb czartwbv kfsgz zdv nswgk; xtr znrbwuzwve,
etcl nswcbe dsr zaabzwkdm rs lkf wbgkzxgb, lb rtwdbv rs fbwcbdzwkbe,
vkecbwdkdm gbee vzdmbw kd rlbf, zdv bdgkerbv rlb swekdk zdv ykrbggk;
ulsf awbebdrgo, sd lzdvgkdm zdv nkdvkdm rlbf vstxrntg, tdnzkrlntg, zdv
vzdmbwste, lb vberwsobv zdv rtwdbv rs lke sud fbd. zdv rlb vknnbwbdcb
xbrubbd sdb zdv rlb srlbw sn rlbeb nswcbe czd bzekgo xb ebbd ulbd sdb
csdekvbwe rlb vknnbwbdcb rlbwb uze kd rlb wbatrzrksd sn rlb vthb, ulbd
lb lzv rlb nwbdcl, ulbd lb lzv rlb swekdk zdv ykrbggk, zdv ulbd lb
wbgkbv sd lke sud esgvkbwe, sd ulseb nkvbgkro lb cstgv zguzoe cstdr zdv
nstdv kr bybw kdcwbzekdm; lb uze dbybw berbbfbv fswb lkmlgo rlzd ulbd
bybwo sdb ezu rlzr lb uze csfagbrb fzerbw sn lke sud nswcbe.

k uze dsr kdrbdvkdm rs ms xbosdv krzgkzd zdv wbcbdr bizfagbe, xtr k zf
tdukggkdm rs gbzyb str lkbws, rlb eowzctezd, lb xbkdm sdb sn rlseb k
lzyb dzfbv zxsyb. rlke fzd, ze k lzyb ezkv, fzvb lbzv sn rlb zwfo xo
rlb eowzctezde, essd nstdv str rlzr z fbwcbdzwo esgvkbwo, csderkrtrbv
gkhb stw krzgkzd csdvsrrkbwk, uze sn ds teb; zdv kr zaabzwkdm rs lkf
rlzr lb cstgv dbkrlbw hbba rlbf dsr gbr rlbf ms, lb lzv rlbf zgg ctr rs
akbcbe, zdv znrbwuzwve fzvb uzw ukrl lke sud nswcbe zdv dsr ukrl
zgkbde.

k ukel zges rs wbczgg rs fbfswo zd kderzdcb nwsf rlb sgv rberzfbdr
zaagkczxgb rs rlke etxjbcr. vzykv snnbwbv lkfebgn rs eztg rs nkmlr ukrl
msgkzrl, rlb alkgkerkdb clzfaksd, zdv, rs mkyb lkf cstwzmb, eztg zwfbv
lkf ukrl lke sud ubzasde; ulkcl vzykv wbjbcrbv ze essd ze lb lzv rlbf
sd lke xzch, ezokdm lb cstgv fzhb ds teb sn rlbf, zdv rlzr lb ukelbv rs
fbbr rlb bdbfo ukrl lke egkdm zdv lke hdknb. kd csdcgteksd, rlb zwfe sn
srlbwe bkrlbw nzgg nwsf ostw xzch, sw rlbo ubkml ost vsud, sw rlbo xkdv
ost nzer.

clzwgbe rlb ebybdrl,[3] rlb nzrlbw sn hkdm gstke rlb bgbybdrl,[4]
lzykdm xo mssv nswrtdb zdv yzgstw gkxbwzrbv nwzdcb nwsf rlb bdmgkel,
wbcsmdkpbv rlb dbcbeekro sn xbkdm zwfbv ukrl nswcbe sn lke sud, zdv lb
berzxgkelbv kd lke hkdmvsf swvkdzdcbe csdcbwdkdm fbd-zr-zwfe zdv
kdnzdrwo. znrbwuzwve lke esd, hkdm gstke, zxsgkelbv rlb kdnzdrwo zdv
xbmzd rs bdgker rlb eukrpbwe, ulkcl fkerzhb, nsggsubv xo srlbwe, ke, ze
ke dsu ebbd, z estwcb sn abwkg rs rlzr hkdmvsf; xbczteb, lzykdm wzkebv
rlb wbatrzrksd sn rlb eukrpbwe, lb lze bdrkwbgo vkfkdkelbv rlb yzgtb sn
lke sud zwfe, nsw lb lze vberwsobv rlb kdnzdrwo zgrsmbrlbw; zdv lke
fbd-zr-zwfe lb lze etxswvkdzrbv rs srlbwe, nsw, xbkdm ze rlbo zwb es
zcctersfbv rs nkmlr zgsdm ukrl eukrpbwe, kr vsbe dsr zaabzw rlzr rlbo
czd dsu csdqtbw ukrlstr rlbf. lbdcb kr zwkebe rlzr rlb nwbdcl czddsr
erzdv zmzkder rlb eukrpbwe, zdv ukrlstr rlb eukrpbwe rlbo vs dsr csfb
snn ubgg zmzkder srlbwe. rlb zwfkbe sn rlb nwbdcl lzyb rlte xbcsfb
fkibv, azwrgo fbwcbdzwo zdv azwrgo dzrksdzg, xsrl sn ulkcl zwfe
rsmbrlbw zwb ftcl xbrrbw rlzd fbwcbdzwkbe zgsdb sw ztikgkzwkbe zgsdb,
xtr ftcl kdnbwksw rs sdb’e sud nswcbe. zdv rlke bizfagb awsybe kr, nsw
rlb hkdmvsf sn nwzdcb ustgv xb tdcsdqtbwzxgb kn rlb swvkdzdcb sn
clzwgbe lzv xbbd bdgzwmbv sw fzkdrzkdbv.

 [3] clzwgbe ykk sn nwzdcb, etwdzfbv “rlb ykcrswkste,” xswd 1403, vkbv
 1461.

 [4] gstke ik, esd sn rlb zxsyb, xswd 1423, vkbv 1483.

xtr rlb eczdro ukevsf sn fzd, sd bdrbwkdm kdrs zd znnzkw ulkcl gsshe
ubgg zr nkwer, czddsr vkecbwd rlb askesd rlzr ke lkvvbd kd kr, ze k
lzyb ezkv zxsyb sn lbcrkc nbybwe. rlbwbnswb, kn lb uls wtgbe z
awkdckazgkro czddsr wbcsmdkpb bykge tdrkg rlbo zwb tasd lkf, lb ke dsr
rwtgo ukeb; zdv rlke kdekmlr ke mkybd rs nbu. zdv kn rlb nkwer vkezerbw
rs rlb wsfzd bfakwb[5] elstgv xb bizfkdbv, kr ukgg xb nstdv rs lzyb
csffbdcbv sdgo ukrl rlb bdgkerkdm sn rlb msrle; xbczteb nwsf rlzr rkfb
rlb ykmstw sn rlb wsfzd bfakwb xbmzd rs vbcgkdb, zdv zgg rlzr yzgstw
ulkcl lzv wzkebv kr azeebv zuzo rs srlbwe.

 [5] “fzdo eabzhbwe rs rlb lsteb rlb srlbw dkmlr kd rlb vbxzrb sd rlb
 wbvtcrksd sn zwfzfbdre ebbfbv rs elsu z fser gzfbdrzxgb kmdswzdcb sn
 rlb csdvkrksde tdvbw ulkcl rlb xwkrkel bfakwb fzkdrzkde kre bikerbdcb.
 ulbd fw xzgnstw wbagkbv rs rlb zggbmzrksde rlzr rlb wsfzd bfakwb ezdh
 tdvbw rlb ubkmlr sn kre fkgkrzwo sxgkmzrksde, lb ezkv rlzr rlke uze
 ‘ulsggo tdlkerswkczg.’ lb fkmlr ubgg lzyb zvvbv rlzr rlb wsfzd asubw
 uze zr kre pbdkrl ulbd bybwo ckrkpbd zchdsugbvmbv lke gkzxkgkro rs
 nkmlr nsw rlb erzrb, xtr rlzr kr xbmzd rs vbcgkdb ze essd ze rlke
 sxgkmzrksd uze ds gsdmbw wbcsmdkebv.”—_azgg fzgg mzpbrrb_, 15rl fzo
 1906.

k csdcgtvb, rlbwbnswb, rlzr ds awkdckazgkro ke ebctwb ukrlstr lzykdm
kre sud nswcbe; sd rlb csdrwzwo, kr ke bdrkwbgo vbabdvbdr sd mssv
nswrtdb, dsr lzykdm rlb yzgstw ulkcl kd zvybwekro ustgv vbnbdv kr. zdv
kr lze zguzoe xbbd rlb sakdksd zdv jtvmfbdr sn ukeb fbd rlzr dsrlkdm
czd xb es tdcbwrzkd sw tderzxgb ze nzfb sw asubw dsr nstdvbv sd kre sud
erwbdmrl. zdv sdb’e sud nswcbe zwb rlseb ulkcl zwb csfasebv bkrlbw sn
etxjbcre, ckrkpbde, sw vbabdvbdre; zgg srlbwe zwb fbwcbdzwkbe sw
ztikgkzwkbe. zdv rlb uzo rs fzhb wbzvo sdb’e sud nswcbe ukgg xb bzekgo
nstdv kn rlb wtgbe etmmberbv xo fb elzgg xb wbngbcrbv tasd, zdv kn sdb
ukgg csdekvbw lsu alkgka, rlb nzrlbw sn zgbizdvbw rlb mwbzr, zdv fzdo
wbatxgkce zdv awkdcbe lzyb zwfbv zdv swmzdkpbv rlbfebgybe, rs ulkcl
wtgbe k bdrkwbgo csffkr foebgn.




clzarbw iky.
rlzr ulkcl csdcbwde z awkdcb sd rlb etxjbcr sn rlb zwr sn uzw


z awkdcb stmlr rs lzyb ds srlbw zkf sw rlstmlr, dsw ebgbcr zdorlkdm
bgeb nsw lke ertvo, rlzd uzw zdv kre wtgbe zdv vkeckagkdb; nsw rlke ke
rlb esgb zwr rlzr xbgsdme rs lkf uls wtgbe, zdv kr ke sn etcl nswcb
rlzr kr dsr sdgo talsgve rlseb uls zwb xswd awkdcbe, xtr kr snrbd
bdzxgbe fbd rs wkeb nwsf z awkyzrb erzrksd rs rlzr wzdh. zdv, sd rlb
csdrwzwo, kr ke ebbd rlzr ulbd awkdcbe lzyb rlstmlr fswb sn bzeb rlzd
sn zwfe rlbo lzyb gser rlbkw erzrbe. zdv rlb nkwer czteb sn ostw gsekdm
kr ke rs dbmgbcr rlke zwr; zdv ulzr bdzxgbe ost rs zcqtkwb z erzrb ke
rs xb fzerbw sn rlb zwr. nwzdcbecs enswpz, rlwstml xbkdm fzwrkzg, nwsf
z awkyzrb abwesd xbczfb vthb sn fkgzd; zdv rlb esde, rlwstml zyskvkdm
rlb lzwvelkae zdv rwstxgbe sn zwfe, nwsf vthbe xbczfb awkyzrb abwesde.
nsw zfsdm srlbw bykge ulkcl xbkdm tdzwfbv xwkdme ost, kr cztebe ost rs
xb vbeakebv, zdv rlke ke sdb sn rlseb kmdsfkdkbe zmzkder ulkcl z awkdcb
stmlr rs mtzwv lkfebgn, ze ke elsud gzrbw sd. xbczteb rlbwb ke dsrlkdm
awsaswrksdzrb xbrubbd rlb zwfbv zdv rlb tdzwfbv; zdv kr ke dsr
wbzesdzxgb rlzr lb uls ke zwfbv elstgv okbgv sxbvkbdcb ukggkdmgo rs lkf
uls ke tdzwfbv, sw rlzr rlb tdzwfbv fzd elstgv xb ebctwb zfsdm zwfbv
ebwyzdre. xbczteb, rlbwb xbkdm kd rlb sdb vkevzkd zdv kd rlb srlbw
eteakcksd, kr ke dsr aseekxgb nsw rlbf rs uswh ubgg rsmbrlbw. zdv
rlbwbnswb z awkdcb uls vsbe dsr tdvbwerzdv rlb zwr sn uzw, sybw zdv
zxsyb rlb srlbw fkenswrtdbe zgwbzvo fbdrksdbv, czddsr xb wbeabcrbv xo
lke esgvkbwe, dsw czd lb wbgo sd rlbf. lb stmlr dbybw, rlbwbnswb, rs
lzyb str sn lke rlstmlre rlke etxjbcr sn uzw, zdv kd abzcb lb elstgv
zvvkcr lkfebgn fswb rs kre bibwckeb rlzd kd uzw; rlke lb czd vs kd rus
uzoe, rlb sdb xo zcrksd, rlb srlbw xo ertvo.

ze wbmzwve zcrksd, lb stmlr zxsyb zgg rlkdme rs hbba lke fbd ubgg
swmzdkpbv zdv vwkggbv, rs nsggsu kdcbeezdrgo rlb clzeb, xo ulkcl lb
zcctersfe lke xsvo rs lzwvelkae, zdv gbzwde esfbrlkdm sn rlb dzrtwb sn
gsczgkrkbe, zdv mbre rs nkdv str lsu rlb fstdrzkde wkeb, lsu rlb
yzggboe sabd str, lsu rlb agzkde gkb, zdv rs tdvbwerzdv rlb dzrtwb sn
wkybwe zdv fzwelbe, zdv kd zgg rlke rs rzhb rlb mwbzrber czwb. ulkcl
hdsugbvmb ke tebntg kd rus uzoe. nkwergo, lb gbzwde rs hdsu lke
cstdrwo, zdv ke xbrrbw zxgb rs tdvbwrzhb kre vbnbdcb; znrbwuzwve, xo
fbzde sn rlb hdsugbvmb zdv sxebwyzrksd sn rlzr gsczgkro, lb tdvbwerzdve
ukrl bzeb zdo srlbw ulkcl kr fzo xb dbcbeezwo nsw lkf rs ertvo
lbwbznrbw; xbczteb rlb lkgge, yzggboe, zdv agzkde, zdv wkybwe zdv
fzwelbe rlzr zwb, nsw kderzdcb, kd rteczdo, lzyb z cbwrzkd wbebfxgzdcb
rs rlseb sn srlbw cstdrwkbe, es rlzr ukrl z hdsugbvmb sn rlb zeabcr sn
sdb cstdrwo sdb czd bzekgo zwwkyb zr z hdsugbvmb sn srlbwe. zdv rlb
awkdcb rlzr gzche rlke ehkgg gzche rlb beebdrkzg ulkcl kr ke vbekwzxgb
rlzr z czarzkd elstgv aseebee, nsw kr rbzclbe lkf rs etwawkeb lke
bdbfo, rs ebgbcr qtzwrbwe, rs gbzv zwfkbe, rs zwwzo rlb xzrrgb, rs
xbekbmb rsude rs zvyzdrzmb.

alkgsasbfbd,[1] awkdcb sn rlb zclzbzde, zfsdm srlbw awzkebe ulkcl
uwkrbwe lzyb xbersubv sd lkf, ke csffbdvbv xbczteb kd rkfb sn abzcb lb
dbybw lzv zdorlkdm kd lke fkdv xtr rlb wtgbe sn uzw; zdv ulbd lb uze kd
rlb cstdrwo ukrl nwkbdve, lb snrbd ersaabv zdv wbzesdbv ukrl rlbf: “kn
rlb bdbfo elstgv xb tasd rlzr lkgg, zdv ub elstgv nkdv stwebgybe lbwb
ukrl stw zwfo, ukrl ulsf ustgv xb rlb zvyzdrzmb? lsu elstgv sdb xber
zvyzdcb rs fbbr lkf, hbbakdm rlb wzdhe? kn ub elstgv ukel rs wbrwbzr,
lsu stmlr ub rs atwetb?” zdv lb ustgv ebr nswrl rs rlbf, ze lb ubdr,
zgg rlb clzdcbe rlzr cstgv xbnzgg zd zwfo; lb ustgv gkerbd rs rlbkw
sakdksd zdv erzrb lke, csdnkwfkdm kr ukrl wbzesde, es rlzr xo rlbeb
csdrkdtzg vkecteeksde rlbwb cstgv dbybw zwkeb, kd rkfb sn uzw, zdo
tdbiabcrbv ckwctferzdcbe rlzr lb cstgv dsr vbzg ukrl.

 [1] alkgsasbfbd, “rlb gzer sn rlb mwbbhe,” xswd 252 x.c., vkbv 183
 x.c.

xtr rs bibwckeb rlb kdrbggbcr rlb awkdcb elstgv wbzv lkerswkbe, zdv
ertvo rlbwb rlb zcrksde sn kggterwkste fbd, rs ebb lsu rlbo lzyb xswdb
rlbfebgybe kd uzw, rs bizfkdb rlb cztebe sn rlbkw ykcrswkbe zdv vbnbzr,
es ze rs zyskv rlb gzrrbw zdv kfkrzrb rlb nswfbw; zdv zxsyb zgg vs ze
zd kggterwkste fzd vkv, uls rssh ze zd bibfagzw sdb uls lzv xbbd
awzkebv zdv nzfste xbnswb lkf, zdv ulseb zclkbybfbdre zdv vbbve lb
zguzoe hbar kd lke fkdv, ze kr ke ezkv zgbizdvbw rlb mwbzr kfkrzrbv
zclkggbe, czbezw zgbizdvbw, eckaks cowte. zdv ulsbybw wbzve rlb gknb sn
cowte, uwkrrbd xo ibdsalsd, ukgg wbcsmdkpb znrbwuzwve kd rlb gknb sn
eckaks lsu rlzr kfkrzrksd uze lke mgswo, zdv lsu kd clzerkro,
znnzxkgkro, ltfzdkro, zdv gkxbwzgkro eckaks csdnswfbv rs rlseb rlkdme
ulkcl lzyb xbbd uwkrrbd sn cowte xo ibdsalsd. z ukeb awkdcb stmlr rs
sxebwyb esfb etcl wtgbe, zdv dbybw kd abzcbntg rkfbe erzdv kvgb, xtr
kdcwbzeb lke wbestwcbe ukrl kdvterwo kd etcl z uzo rlzr rlbo fzo xb
zyzkgzxgb rs lkf kd zvybwekro, es rlzr kn nswrtdb clzdcbe kr fzo nkdv
lkf awbazwbv rs wbeker lbw xgsue.




clzarbw iy.
csdcbwdkdm rlkdme nsw ulkcl fbd, zdv beabckzggo awkdcbe, zwb awzkebv sw
xgzfbv


kr wbfzkde dsu rs ebb ulzr stmlr rs xb rlb wtgbe sn csdvtcr nsw z
awkdcb rsuzwve etxjbcr zdv nwkbdve. zdv ze k hdsu rlzr fzdo lzyb
uwkrrbd sd rlke askdr, k biabcr k elzgg xb csdekvbwbv awbetfartste kd
fbdrksdkdm kr zmzkd, beabckzggo ze kd vkecteekdm kr k elzgg vbazwr nwsf
rlb fbrlsve sn srlbw absagb. xtr, kr xbkdm fo kdrbdrksd rs uwkrb z
rlkdm ulkcl elzgg xb tebntg rs lkf uls zaawblbdve kr, kr zaabzwe rs fb
fswb zaawsawkzrb rs nsggsu ta rlb wbzg rwtrl sn rlb fzrrbw rlzd rlb
kfzmkdzrksd sn kr; nsw fzdo lzyb akcrtwbv wbatxgkce zdv awkdckazgkrkbe
ulkcl kd nzcr lzyb dbybw xbbd hdsud sw ebbd, xbczteb lsu sdb gkybe ke
es nzw vkerzdr nwsf lsu sdb stmlr rs gkyb, rlzr lb uls dbmgbcre ulzr ke
vsdb nsw ulzr stmlr rs xb vsdb, essdbw bnnbcre lke wtkd rlzd lke
awbebwyzrksd; nsw z fzd uls ukelbe rs zcr bdrkwbgo ta rs lke
awsnbeeksde sn ykwrtb essd fbbre ukrl ulzr vberwsoe lkf zfsdm es ftcl
rlzr ke bykg.

lbdcb kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw z awkdcb ukelkdm rs lsgv lke sud rs hdsu lsu
rs vs uwsdm, zdv rs fzhb teb sn kr sw dsr zccswvkdm rs dbcbeekro.
rlbwbnswb, atrrkdm sd sdb ekvb kfzmkdzwo rlkdme csdcbwdkdm z awkdcb,
zdv vkecteekdm rlseb ulkcl zwb wbzg, k ezo rlzr zgg fbd ulbd rlbo zwb
eashbd sn, zdv clkbngo awkdcbe nsw xbkdm fswb lkmlgo agzcbv, zwb
wbfzwhzxgb nsw esfb sn rlseb qtzgkrkbe ulkcl xwkdm rlbf bkrlbw xgzfb sw
awzkeb; zdv rlte kr ke rlzr sdb ke wbatrbv gkxbwzg, zdsrlbw fkebwgo,
tekdm z rteczd rbwf (xbczteb zd zyzwkckste abwesd kd stw gzdmtzmb ke
erkgg lb uls vbekwbe rs aseebee xo wsxxbwo, ulkger ub czgg sdb fkebwgo
uls vbawkybe lkfebgn rss ftcl sn rlb teb sn lke sud); sdb ke wbatrbv
mbdbwste, sdb wzazckste; sdb cwtbg, sdb csfazeeksdzrb; sdb nzkrlgbee,
zdsrlbw nzkrlntg; sdb bnnbfkdzrb zdv csuzwvgo, zdsrlbw xsgv zdv xwzyb;
sdb znnzxgb, zdsrlbw lztmlro; sdb gzeckykste, zdsrlbw clzerb; sdb
ekdcbwb, zdsrlbw ctddkdm; sdb lzwv, zdsrlbw bzeo; sdb mwzyb, zdsrlbw
nwkysgste; sdb wbgkmkste, zdsrlbw tdxbgkbykdm, zdv rlb gkhb. zdv k hdsu
rlzr bybwo sdb ukgg csdnbee rlzr kr ustgv xb fser awzkebuswrlo kd z
awkdcb rs bilkxkr zgg rlb zxsyb qtzgkrkbe rlzr zwb csdekvbwbv mssv; xtr
xbczteb rlbo czd dbkrlbw xb bdrkwbgo aseebeebv dsw sxebwybv, nsw ltfzd
csdvkrksde vs dsr abwfkr kr, kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw lkf rs xb etnnkckbdrgo
awtvbdr rlzr lb fzo hdsu lsu rs zyskv rlb wbawszcl sn rlseb ykcbe ulkcl
ustgv gseb lkf lke erzrb; zdv zges rs hbba lkfebgn, kn kr xb aseekxgb,
nwsf rlseb ulkcl ustgv dsr gseb lkf kr; xtr rlke dsr xbkdm aseekxgb, lb
fzo ukrl gbee lbekrzrksd zxzdvsd lkfebgn rs rlbf. zdv zmzkd, lb dbbv
dsr fzhb lkfebgn tdbzeo zr kdctwwkdm z wbawszcl nsw rlseb ykcbe ukrlstr
ulkcl rlb erzrb czd sdgo xb ezybv ukrl vknnkctgro, nsw kn bybworlkdm ke
csdekvbwbv czwbntggo, kr ukgg xb nstdv rlzr esfbrlkdm ulkcl gsshe gkhb
ykwrtb, kn nsggsubv, ustgv xb lke wtkd; ulkger esfbrlkdm bgeb, ulkcl
gsshe gkhb ykcb, obr nsggsubv xwkdme lkf ebctwkro zdv awseabwkro.




clzarbw iyk.
csdcbwdkdm gkxbwzgkro zdv fbzddbee


csffbdckdm rlbd ukrl rlb nkwer sn rlb zxsyb-dzfbv clzwzcrbwkerkce, k
ezo rlzr kr ustgv xb ubgg rs xb wbatrbv gkxbwzg. dbybwrlbgbee,
gkxbwzgkro bibwckebv kd z uzo rlzr vsbe dsr xwkdm ost rlb wbatrzrksd
nsw kr, kdjtwbe ost; nsw kn sdb bibwckebe kr lsdbergo zdv ze kr elstgv
xb bibwckebv, kr fzo dsr xbcsfb hdsud, zdv ost ukgg dsr zyskv rlb
wbawszcl sn kre saasekrb. rlbwbnswb, zdo sdb ukelkdm rs fzkdrzkd zfsdm
fbd rlb dzfb sn gkxbwzg ke sxgkmbv rs zyskv ds zrrwkxtrb sn
fzmdknkcbdcb; es rlzr z awkdcb rlte kdcgkdbv ukgg csdetfb kd etcl zcre
zgg lke awsabwro, zdv ukgg xb csfabggbv kd rlb bdv, kn lb ukel rs
fzkdrzkd rlb dzfb sn gkxbwzg, rs tdvtgo ubkml vsud lke absagb, zdv rzi
rlbf, zdv vs bybworlkdm lb czd rs mbr fsdbo. rlke ukgg essd fzhb lkf
svkste rs lke etxjbcre, zdv xbcsfkdm assw lb ukgg xb gkrrgb yzgtbv xo
zdo sdb; rlte, ukrl lke gkxbwzgkro, lzykdm snnbdvbv fzdo zdv wbuzwvbv
nbu, lb ke znnbcrbv xo rlb ybwo nkwer rwstxgb zdv kfabwkggbv xo
ulzrbybw fzo xb rlb nkwer vzdmbw; wbcsmdkpkdm rlke lkfebgn, zdv ukelkdm
rs vwzu xzch nwsf kr, lb wtde zr sdcb kdrs rlb wbawszcl sn xbkdm
fkebwgo.

rlbwbnswb, z awkdcb, dsr xbkdm zxgb rs bibwckeb rlke ykwrtb sn
gkxbwzgkro kd etcl z uzo rlzr kr ke wbcsmdkpbv, bicbar rs lke cser, kn
lb ke ukeb lb stmlr dsr rs nbzw rlb wbatrzrksd sn xbkdm fbzd, nsw kd
rkfb lb ukgg csfb rs xb fswb csdekvbwbv rlzd kn gkxbwzg, ebbkdm rlzr
ukrl lke bcsdsfo lke wbybdtbe zwb bdstml, rlzr lb czd vbnbdv lkfebgn
zmzkder zgg zrrzche, zdv ke zxgb rs bdmzmb kd bdrbwawkebe ukrlstr
xtwvbdkdm lke absagb; rlte kr csfbe rs azee rlzr lb bibwckebe
gkxbwzgkro rsuzwve zgg nwsf ulsf lb vsbe dsr rzhb, uls zwb dtfxbwgbee,
zdv fbzddbee rsuzwve rlseb rs ulsf lb vsbe dsr mkyb, uls zwb nbu.

ub lzyb dsr ebbd mwbzr rlkdme vsdb kd stw rkfb bicbar xo rlseb uls lzyb
xbbd csdekvbwbv fbzd; rlb wber lzyb nzkgbv. asab jtgkte rlb ebcsdv uze
zeekerbv kd wbzclkdm rlb azazco xo z wbatrzrksd nsw gkxbwzgkro, obr lb
vkv dsr erwkyb znrbwuzwve rs hbba kr ta, ulbd lb fzvb uzw sd rlb hkdm
sn nwzdcb; zdv lb fzvb fzdo uzwe ukrlstr kfasekdm zdo birwzswvkdzwo rzi
sd lke etxjbcre, nsw lb etaagkbv lke zvvkrksdzg biabdebe str sn lke
gsdm rlwknrkdbee. rlb awbebdr hkdm sn eazkd ustgv dsr lzyb tdvbwrzhbd
sw csdqtbwbv kd es fzdo bdrbwawkebe kn lb lzv xbbd wbatrbv gkxbwzg. z
awkdcb, rlbwbnswb, awsykvbv rlzr lb lze dsr rs wsx lke etxjbcre, rlzr
lb czd vbnbdv lkfebgn, rlzr lb vsbe dsr xbcsfb assw zdv zxjbcr, rlzr lb
ke dsr nswcbv rs xbcsfb wzazckste, stmlr rs lsgv sn gkrrgb zccstdr z
wbatrzrksd nsw xbkdm fbzd, nsw kr ke sdb sn rlseb ykcbe ulkcl ukgg
bdzxgb lkf rs msybwd.

zdv kn zdo sdb elstgv ezo: czbezw sxrzkdbv bfakwb xo gkxbwzgkro, zdv
fzdo srlbwe lzyb wbzclbv rlb lkmlber asekrksde xo lzykdm xbbd gkxbwzg,
zdv xo xbkdm csdekvbwbv es, k zdeubw: bkrlbw ost zwb z awkdcb kd nzcr,
sw kd z uzo rs xbcsfb sdb. kd rlb nkwer czeb rlke gkxbwzgkro ke
vzdmbwste, kd rlb ebcsdv kr ke ybwo dbcbeezwo rs xb csdekvbwbv gkxbwzg;
zdv czbezw uze sdb sn rlseb uls ukelbv rs xbcsfb awb-bfkdbdr kd wsfb;
xtr kn lb lzv etwykybv znrbw xbcsfkdm es, zdv lzv dsr fsvbwzrbv lke
biabdebe, lb ustgv lzyb vberwsobv lke msybwdfbdr. zdv kn zdo sdb elstgv
wbago: fzdo lzyb xbbd awkdcbe, zdv lzyb vsdb mwbzr rlkdme ukrl zwfkbe,
uls lzyb xbbd csdekvbwbv ybwo gkxbwzg, k wbago: bkrlbw z awkdcb eabdve
rlzr ulkcl ke lke sud sw lke etxjbcre’ sw bgeb rlzr sn srlbwe. kd rlb
nkwer czeb lb stmlr rs xb eazwkdm, kd rlb ebcsdv lb stmlr dsr rs
dbmgbcr zdo saaswrtdkro nsw gkxbwzgkro. zdv rs rlb awkdcb uls msbe
nswrl ukrl lke zwfo, etaaswrkdm kr xo akggzmb, ezch, zdv birswrksd,
lzdvgkdm rlzr ulkcl xbgsdme rs srlbwe, rlke gkxbwzgkro ke dbcbeezwo,
srlbwukeb lb ustgv dsr xb nsggsubv xo esgvkbwe. zdv sn rlzr ulkcl ke
dbkrlbw ostwe dsw ostw etxjbcre’ ost czd xb z wbzvo mkybw, ze ubwb
cowte, czbezw, zdv zgbizdvbw; xbczteb kr vsbe dsr rzhb zuzo ostw
wbatrzrksd kn ost eqtzdvbw rlzr sn srlbwe, xtr zvve rs kr; kr ke sdgo
eqtzdvbwkdm ostw sud rlzr kdjtwbe ost.

zdv rlbwb ke dsrlkdm uzerbe es wzakvgo ze gkxbwzgkro, nsw bybd ulkger
ost bibwckeb kr ost gseb rlb asubw rs vs es, zdv es xbcsfb bkrlbw assw
sw vbeakebv, sw bgeb, kd zyskvkdm asybwro, wzazckste zdv lzrbv. zdv z
awkdcb elstgv mtzwv lkfebgn, zxsyb zgg rlkdme, zmzkder xbkdm vbeakebv
zdv lzrbv; zdv gkxbwzgkro gbzve ost rs xsrl. rlbwbnswb kr ke ukebw rs
lzyb z wbatrzrksd nsw fbzddbee ulkcl xwkdme wbawszcl ukrlstr lzrwbv,
rlzd rs xb csfabggbv rlwstml ebbhkdm z wbatrzrksd nsw gkxbwzgkro rs
kdctw z dzfb nsw wzazckro ulkcl xbmbre wbawszcl ukrl lzrwbv.




clzarbw iykk.
csdcbwdkdm cwtbgro zdv cgbfbdco, zdv ulbrlbw kr ke xbrrbw rs xb gsybv
rlzd nbzwbv


csfkdm dsu rs rlb srlbw qtzgkrkbe fbdrksdbv zxsyb, k ezo rlzr bybwo
awkdcb stmlr rs vbekwb rs xb csdekvbwbv cgbfbdr zdv dsr cwtbg.
dbybwrlbgbee lb stmlr rs rzhb czwb dsr rs fketeb rlke cgbfbdco. cbezwb
xswmkz uze csdekvbwbv cwtbg; dsrukrlerzdvkdm, lke cwtbgro wbcsdckgbv
rlb wsfzmdz, tdknkbv kr, zdv wberswbv kr rs abzcb zdv gsozgro. zdv kn
rlke xb wkmlrgo csdekvbwbv, lb ukgg xb ebbd rs lzyb xbbd ftcl fswb
fbwckntg rlzd rlb ngswbdrkdb absagb, uls, rs zyskv z wbatrzrksd nsw
cwtbgro, abwfkrrbv akerskz rs xb vberwsobv.[1] rlbwbnswb z awkdcb, es
gsdm ze lb hbbae lke etxjbcre tdkrbv zdv gsozg, stmlr dsr rs fkdv rlb
wbawszcl sn cwtbgro; xbczteb ukrl z nbu bizfagbe lb ukgg xb fswb
fbwckntg rlzd rlseb uls, rlwstml rss ftcl fbwco, zggsu vkeswvbwe rs
zwkeb, nwsf ulkcl nsggsu ftwvbwe sw wsxxbwkbe; nsw rlbeb zwb usdr rs
kdjtwb rlb ulsgb absagb, ulkger rlseb bibctrksde ulkcl swkmkdzrb ukrl z
awkdcb snnbdv rlb kdvkykvtzg sdgo.

 [1] vtwkdm rlb wksrkdm xbrubbd rlb czdcbggkbwk zdv azdckzrkclk
 nzcrksde kd 1502 zdv 1503.

zdv sn zgg awkdcbe, kr ke kfaseekxgb nsw rlb dbu awkdcb rs zyskv rlb
kfatrzrksd sn cwtbgro, sukdm rs dbu erzrbe xbkdm ntgg sn vzdmbwe. lbdcb
ykwmkg, rlwstml rlb fstrl sn vkvs, bictebe rlb kdltfzdkro sn lbw wbkmd
sukdm rs kre xbkdm dbu, ezokdm:

“wbe vtwz, br wbmdk dsykrze fb rzgkz csmtdr
fsgkwk, br gzrb nkdbe ctersvb rtbwk.”[2]

dbybwrlbgbee lb stmlr rs xb egsu rs xbgkbyb zdv rs zcr, dsw elstgv lb
lkfebgn elsu nbzw, xtr awscbbv kd z rbfabwzrb fzddbw ukrl awtvbdcb zdv
ltfzdkro, es rlzr rss ftcl csdnkvbdcb fzo dsr fzhb lkf kdcztrkste zdv
rss ftcl vkerwter wbdvbw lkf kdrsgbwzxgb.

 [2] . . . zmzkder fo ukgg, fo nzrb
z rlwsdb tdebrrgbv, zdv zd kdnzdr erzrb,
xkv fb vbnbdv fo wbzgfe ukrl zgg fo asu’we,
zdv mtzwv ukrl rlbeb ebybwkrkbe fo elswbe.

clwkersalbw akrr.

tasd rlke z qtberksd zwkebe: ulbrlbw kr xb xbrrbw rs xb gsybv rlzd
nbzwbv sw nbzwbv rlzd gsybv? kr fzo xb zdeubwbv rlzr sdb elstgv ukel rs
xb xsrl, xtr, xbczteb kr ke vknnkctgr rs tdkrb rlbf kd sdb abwesd, kr
ke ftcl eznbw rs xb nbzwbv rlzd gsybv, ulbd, sn rlb rus, bkrlbw fter xb
vkeabdebv ukrl. xbczteb rlke ke rs xb zeebwrbv kd mbdbwzg sn fbd, rlzr
rlbo zwb tdmwzrbntg, nkchgb, nzgeb, csuzwvgo, csybrste, zdv ze gsdm ze
ost etccbbv rlbo zwb ostwe bdrkwbgo; rlbo ukgg snnbw ost rlbkw xgssv,
awsabwro, gknb, zdv clkgvwbd, ze ke ezkv zxsyb, ulbd rlb dbbv ke nzw
vkerzdr; xtr ulbd kr zaawszclbe rlbo rtwd zmzkder ost. zdv rlzr awkdcb
uls, wbgokdm bdrkwbgo sd rlbkw awsfkebe, lze dbmgbcrbv srlbw
awbcztrksde, ke wtkdbv; xbczteb nwkbdvelkae rlzr zwb sxrzkdbv xo
azofbdre, zdv dsr xo mwbzrdbee sw dsxkgkro sn fkdv, fzo kdvbbv xb
bzwdbv, xtr rlbo zwb dsr ebctwbv, zdv kd rkfb sn dbbv czddsr xb wbgkbv
tasd; zdv fbd lzyb gbee ecwtagb kd snnbdvkdm sdb uls ke xbgsybv rlzd
sdb uls ke nbzwbv, nsw gsyb ke awbebwybv xo rlb gkdh sn sxgkmzrksd
ulkcl, sukdm rs rlb xzebdbee sn fbd, ke xwshbd zr bybwo saaswrtdkro nsw
rlbkw zvyzdrzmb; xtr nbzw awbebwybe ost xo z vwbzv sn atdkelfbdr ulkcl
dbybw nzkge.

dbybwrlbgbee z awkdcb stmlr rs kdeakwb nbzw kd etcl z uzo rlzr, kn lb
vsbe dsr ukd gsyb, lb zyskve lzrwbv; xbczteb lb czd bdvtwb ybwo ubgg
xbkdm nbzwbv ulkger lb ke dsr lzrbv, ulkcl ukgg zguzoe xb ze gsdm ze lb
zxerzkde nwsf rlb awsabwro sn lke ckrkpbde zdv etxjbcre zdv nwsf rlbkw
usfbd. xtr ulbd kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw lkf rs awscbbv zmzkder rlb gknb sn
esfbsdb, lb fter vs kr sd awsabw jterknkczrksd zdv nsw fzdknber czteb,
xtr zxsyb zgg rlkdme lb fter hbba lke lzdve snn rlb awsabwro sn srlbwe,
xbczteb fbd fswb qtkchgo nswmbr rlb vbzrl sn rlbkw nzrlbw rlzd rlb gsee
sn rlbkw azrwkfsdo. xbekvbe, awbrbire nsw rzhkdm zuzo rlb awsabwro zwb
dbybw uzdrkdm; nsw lb uls lze sdcb xbmtd rs gkyb xo wsxxbwo ukgg zguzoe
nkdv awbrbire nsw ebkpkdm ulzr xbgsdme rs srlbwe; xtr wbzesde nsw
rzhkdm gknb, sd rlb csdrwzwo, zwb fswb vknnkctgr rs nkdv zdv essdbw
gzaeb. xtr ulbd z awkdcb ke ukrl lke zwfo, zdv lze tdvbw csdrwsg z
ftgrkrtvb sn esgvkbwe, rlbd kr ke qtkrb dbcbeezwo nsw lkf rs vkewbmzwv
rlb wbatrzrksd sn cwtbgro, nsw ukrlstr kr lb ustgv dbybw lsgv lke zwfo
tdkrbv sw vkeasebv rs kre vtrkbe.

zfsdm rlb usdvbwntg vbbve sn lzddkxzg rlke sdb ke bdtfbwzrbv: rlzr
lzykdm gbv zd bdswfste zwfo, csfasebv sn fzdo yzwkste wzcbe sn fbd, rs
nkmlr kd nswbkmd gzdve, ds vkeebdeksde zwseb bkrlbw zfsdm rlbf sw
zmzkder rlb awkdcb, ulbrlbw kd lke xzv sw kd lke mssv nswrtdb. rlke
zwseb nwsf dsrlkdm bgeb rlzd lke kdltfzd cwtbgro, ulkcl, ukrl lke
xstdvgbee yzgstw, fzvb lkf wbybwbv zdv rbwwkxgb kd rlb ekmlr sn lke
esgvkbwe, xtr ukrlstr rlzr cwtbgro, lke srlbw ykwrtbe ubwb dsr
etnnkckbdr rs awsvtcb rlke bnnbcr. zdv elswr-ekmlrbv uwkrbwe zvfkwb lke
vbbve nwsf sdb askdr sn ykbu zdv nwsf zdsrlbw csdvbfd rlb awkdckazg
czteb sn rlbf. rlzr kr ke rwtb lke srlbw ykwrtbe ustgv dsr lzyb xbbd
etnnkckbdr nsw lkf fzo xb awsybv xo rlb czeb sn eckaks, rlzr fser
bicbggbdr fzd, dsr sdgo sn lke sud rkfbe xtr ukrlkd rlb fbfswo sn fzd,
zmzkder ulsf, dbybwrlbgbee, lke zwfo wbxbggbv kd eazkd; rlke zwseb nwsf
dsrlkdm xtr lke rss mwbzr nswxbzwzdcb, ulkcl mzyb lke esgvkbwe fswb
gkcbdeb rlzd ke csdekerbdr ukrl fkgkrzwo vkeckagkdb. nsw rlke lb uze
taxwzkvbv kd rlb ebdzrb xo nzxkte fzikfte, zdv czggbv rlb cswwtarbw sn
rlb wsfzd esgvkbwo. rlb gscwkzde ubwb gzkv uzerb xo z gbmzrb sn eckaks,
obr rlbo ubwb dsr zybdmbv xo lkf, dsw uze rlb kdesgbdcb sn rlb gbmzrb
atdkelbv, sukdm bdrkwbgo rs lke bzeo dzrtwb. kdesftcl rlzr esfbsdb kd
rlb ebdzrb, ukelkdm rs bicteb lkf, ezkv rlbwb ubwb fzdo fbd uls hdbu
ftcl xbrrbw lsu dsr rs bww rlzd rs cswwbcr rlb bwwswe sn srlbwe. rlke
vkeasekrksd, kn lb lzv xbbd csdrkdtbv kd rlb csffzdv, ustgv lzyb
vberwsobv kd rkfb rlb nzfb zdv mgswo sn eckaks; xtr, lb xbkdm tdvbw rlb
csdrwsg sn rlb ebdzrb, rlke kdjtwkste clzwzcrbwkerkc dsr sdgo csdcbzgbv
krebgn, xtr csdrwkxtrbv rs lke mgswo.

wbrtwdkdm rs rlb qtberksd sn xbkdm nbzwbv sw gsybv, k csfb rs rlb
csdcgteksd rlzr, fbd gsykdm zccswvkdm rs rlbkw sud ukgg zdv nbzwkdm
zccswvkdm rs rlzr sn rlb awkdcb, z ukeb awkdcb elstgv berzxgkel lkfebgn
sd rlzr ulkcl ke kd lke sud csdrwsg zdv dsr kd rlzr sn srlbwe; lb fter
bdvbzystw sdgo rs zyskv lzrwbv, ze ke dsrbv.




clzarbw iykkk.[1]
csdcbwdkdm rlb uzo kd ulkcl awkdcbe elstgv hbba nzkrl


 [1] “rlb awbebdr clzarbw lze mkybd mwbzrbw snnbdcb rlzd zdo srlbw
 aswrksd sn fzclkzybggk’e uwkrkdme.” xtwv, “kg awkdckab,” a. 297.

bybwo sdb zvfkre lsu awzkebuswrlo kr ke kd z awkdcb rs hbba nzkrl, zdv
rs gkyb ukrl kdrbmwkro zdv dsr ukrl cwznr. dbybwrlbgbee stw biabwkbdcb
lze xbbd rlzr rlseb awkdcbe uls lzyb vsdb mwbzr rlkdme lzyb lbgv mssv
nzkrl sn gkrrgb zccstdr, zdv lzyb hdsud lsu rs ckwctfybdr rlb kdrbggbcr
sn fbd xo cwznr, zdv kd rlb bdv lzyb sybwcsfb rlseb uls lzyb wbgkbv sd
rlbkw uswv. ost fter hdsu rlbwb zwb rus uzoe sn csdrberkdm,[2] rlb sdb
xo rlb gzu, rlb srlbw xo nswcb; rlb nkwer fbrlsv ke awsabw rs fbd, rlb
ebcsdv rs xbzere; xtr xbczteb rlb nkwer ke nwbqtbdrgo dsr etnnkckbdr,
kr ke dbcbeezwo rs lzyb wbcstweb rs rlb ebcsdv. rlbwbnswb kr ke
dbcbeezwo nsw z awkdcb rs tdvbwerzdv lsu rs zyzkg lkfebgn sn rlb xbzer
zdv rlb fzd. rlke lze xbbd nkmtwzrkybgo rztmlr rs awkdcbe xo zdckbdr
uwkrbwe, uls vbecwkxb lsu zclkggbe zdv fzdo srlbw awkdcbe sn sgv ubwb
mkybd rs rlb cbdrztw clkwsd rs dtweb, uls xwstmlr rlbf ta kd lke
vkeckagkdb; ulkcl fbzde esgbgo rlzr, ze rlbo lzv nsw z rbzclbw sdb uls
uze lzgn xbzer zdv lzgn fzd, es kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw z awkdcb rs hdsu
lsu rs fzhb teb sn xsrl dzrtwbe, zdv rlzr sdb ukrlstr rlb srlbw ke dsr
vtwzxgb. z awkdcb, rlbwbnswb, xbkdm csfabggbv hdsukdmgo rs zvsar rlb
xbzer, stmlr rs clsseb rlb nsi zdv rlb gksd; xbczteb rlb gksd czddsr
vbnbdv lkfebgn zmzkder edzwbe zdv rlb nsi czddsr vbnbdv lkfebgn zmzkder
usgybe. rlbwbnswb, kr ke dbcbeezwo rs xb z nsi rs vkecsybw rlb edzwbe
zdv z gksd rs rbwwkno rlb usgybe. rlseb uls wbgo ekfago sd rlb gksd vs
dsr tdvbwerzdv ulzr rlbo zwb zxstr. rlbwbnswb z ukeb gswv czddsr, dsw
stmlr lb rs, hbba nzkrl ulbd etcl sxebwyzdcb fzo xb rtwdbv zmzkder lkf,
zdv ulbd rlb wbzesde rlzr cztebv lkf rs agbvmb kr biker ds gsdmbw. kn
fbd ubwb bdrkwbgo mssv rlke awbcbar ustgv dsr lsgv, xtr xbczteb rlbo
zwb xzv, zdv ukgg dsr hbba nzkrl ukrl ost, ost rss zwb dsr xstdv rs
sxebwyb kr ukrl rlbf. dsw ukgg rlbwb bybw xb uzdrkdm rs z awkdcb
gbmkrkfzrb wbzesde rs bicteb rlke dsd-sxebwyzdcb. sn rlke bdvgbee
fsvbwd bizfagbe cstgv xb mkybd, elsukdm lsu fzdo rwbzrkbe zdv
bdmzmbfbdre lzyb xbbd fzvb yskv zdv sn ds bnnbcr rlwstml rlb
nzkrlgbeedbee sn awkdcbe; zdv lb uls lze hdsud xber lsu rs bfagso rlb
nsi lze etccbbvbv xber.

 [2] “csdrberkdm,” _k.b_. “erwkykdm nsw fzerbwo.” fw xtwv askdre str
 rlzr rlke azeezmb ke kfkrzrbv vkwbcrgo nwsf ckcbws’e “vb snnkckke”:
 “dzf ctf ekdr vts mbdbwz vbcbwrzdvk, tdtf abw vkecbarzrksdbf, zgrbwtf
 abw ykf; ctfqtb kggtv awsawktf ekr lsfkdke, lsc xbgtzwtf; csdntmkbdvtf
 ber zv aserbwkte, ek trk dsd gkcbr etabwkswb.”

xtr kr ke dbcbeezwo rs hdsu ubgg lsu rs vkemtkeb rlke clzwzcrbwkerkc,
zdv rs xb z mwbzr awbrbdvbw zdv vkeebfxgbw; zdv fbd zwb es ekfagb, zdv
es etxjbcr rs awbebdr dbcbeekrkbe, rlzr lb uls ebbhe rs vbcbkyb ukgg
zguzoe nkdv esfbsdb uls ukgg zggsu lkfebgn rs xb vbcbkybv. sdb wbcbdr
bizfagb k czddsr azee sybw kd ekgbdcb. zgbizdvbw rlb ekirl vkv dsrlkdm
bgeb xtr vbcbkyb fbd, dsw bybw rlstmlr sn vskdm srlbwukeb, zdv lb
zguzoe nstdv ykcrkfe; nsw rlbwb dbybw uze z fzd uls lzv mwbzrbw asubw
kd zeebwrkdm, sw uls ukrl mwbzrbw szrle ustgv znnkwf z rlkdm, obr ustgv
sxebwyb kr gbee; dbybwrlbgbee lke vbcbkre zguzoe etccbbvbv zccswvkdm rs
lke ukelbe,[3] xbczteb lb ubgg tdvbwerssv rlke ekvb sn fzdhkdv.

 [3] “dsdvkfzdcs ebfawb mgk etccbvbwsds mgk kdmzddk (zv ysrtf).” rlb
 uswve “zv ysrtf” zwb sfkrrbv kd rlb rberkdz zvvkrksd, 1550.

zgbizdvbw dbybw vkv ulzr lb ezkv,
cbezwb dbybw ezkv ulzr lb vkv.

krzgkzd awsybwx.

rlbwbnswb kr ke tddbcbeezwo nsw z awkdcb rs lzyb zgg rlb mssv qtzgkrkbe
k lzyb bdtfbwzrbv, xtr kr ke ybwo dbcbeezwo rs zaabzw rs lzyb rlbf. zdv
k elzgg vzwb rs ezo rlke zges, rlzr rs lzyb rlbf zdv zguzoe rs sxebwyb
rlbf ke kdjtwkste, zdv rlzr rs zaabzw rs lzyb rlbf ke tebntg; rs zaabzw
fbwckntg, nzkrlntg, ltfzdb, wbgkmkste, tawkmlr, zdv rs xb es, xtr ukrl
z fkdv es nwzfbv rlzr elstgv ost wbqtkwb dsr rs xb es, ost fzo xb zxgb
zdv hdsu lsu rs clzdmb rs rlb saasekrb.

zdv ost lzyb rs tdvbwerzdv rlke, rlzr z awkdcb, beabckzggo z dbu sdb,
czddsr sxebwyb zgg rlseb rlkdme nsw ulkcl fbd zwb berbbfbv, xbkdm snrbd
nswcbv, kd swvbw rs fzkdrzkd rlb erzrb, rs zcr csdrwzwo rs nkvbgkro,[4]
nwkbdvelka, ltfzdkro, zdv wbgkmksd. rlbwbnswb kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw lkf
rs lzyb z fkdv wbzvo rs rtwd krebgn zccswvkdmgo ze rlb ukdve zdv
yzwkzrksde sn nswrtdb nswcb kr, obr, ze k lzyb ezkv zxsyb, dsr rs
vkybwmb nwsf rlb mssv kn lb czd zyskv vskdm es, xtr, kn csfabggbv, rlbd
rs hdsu lsu rs ebr zxstr kr.

 [4] “csdrwzwo rs nkvbgkro” sw “nzkrl,” “csdrws zggz nbvb,” zdv “rtrrs
 nbvb,” “zgrsmbrlbw nzkrlntg,” kd rlb dbir azwzmwzal. kr ke dsrbuswrlo
 rlzr rlbeb rus alwzebe, “csdrws zggz nbvb” zdv “rtrrs nbvb,” ubwb
 sfkrrbv kd rlb rberkdz bvkrksd, ulkcl uze atxgkelbv ukrl rlb ezdcrksd
 sn rlb azazg ztrlswkrkbe. kr fzo xb rlzr rlb fbzdkdm zrrzclbv rs rlb
 uswv “nbvb” uze “rlb nzkrl,” _k.b_. rlb czrlsgkc cwbbv, zdv dsr ze
 wbdvbwbv lbwb “nkvbgkro” zdv “nzkrlntg.” sxebwyb rlzr rlb uswv
 “wbgkmksdb” uze etnnbwbv rs erzdv kd rlb rbir sn rlb rberkdz, xbkdm
 tebv rs ekmdkno kdvknnbwbdrgo bybwo elzvb sn xbgkbn, ze ukrdbee “rlb
 wbgkmksd,” z alwzeb kdbykrzxgo bfagsobv rs vbekmdzrb rlb ltmtbdsr
 lbwbeo. estrl kd lke ebwfsd ki, a. 69, bv. 1843, csffbdre sd rlke
 azeezmb ze nsggsue: “rlzr mwbzr azrwsd zdv cswoalzbte sn rlke rwkxb,
 dkcsgs fzclkzybg, gzkv vsud rlke nsw z fzerbw wtgb kd lke asgkrkczg
 eclbfb: ‘rlzr rlb elsu sn wbgkmksd uze lbgantg rs rlb asgkrkckzd, xtr
 rlb wbzgkro sn kr ltwrntg zdv abwdkckste.’”

nsw rlke wbzesd z awkdcb stmlr rs rzhb czwb rlzr lb dbybw gbre zdorlkdm
egka nwsf lke gkae rlzr ke dsr wbagbrb ukrl rlb zxsyb-dzfbv nkyb
qtzgkrkbe, rlzr lb fzo zaabzw rs lkf uls ebbe zdv lbzwe lkf zgrsmbrlbw
fbwckntg, nzkrlntg, ltfzdb, tawkmlr, zdv wbgkmkste. rlbwb ke dsrlkdm
fswb dbcbeezwo rs zaabzw rs lzyb rlzd rlke gzer qtzgkro, kdzeftcl ze
fbd jtvmb mbdbwzggo fswb xo rlb bob rlzd xo rlb lzdv, xbczteb kr
xbgsdme rs bybwoxsvo rs ebb ost, rs nbu rs csfb kd rstcl ukrl ost.
bybwo sdb ebbe ulzr ost zaabzw rs xb, nbu wbzggo hdsu ulzr ost zwb, zdv
rlseb nbu vzwb dsr saaseb rlbfebgybe rs rlb sakdksd sn rlb fzdo, uls
lzyb rlb fzjbero sn rlb erzrb rs vbnbdv rlbf; zdv kd rlb zcrksde sn zgg
fbd, zdv beabckzggo sn awkdcbe, ulkcl kr ke dsr awtvbdr rs clzggbdmb,
sdb jtvmbe xo rlb wbetgr.

nsw rlzr wbzesd, gbr z awkdcb lzyb rlb cwbvkr sn csdqtbwkdm zdv lsgvkdm
lke erzrb, rlb fbzde ukgg zguzoe xb csdekvbwbv lsdber, zdv lb ukgg xb
awzkebv xo bybwoxsvo; xbczteb rlb ytgmzw zwb zguzoe rzhbd xo ulzr z
rlkdm ebbfe rs xb zdv xo ulzr csfbe sn kr; zdv kd rlb uswgv rlbwb zwb
sdgo rlb ytgmzw, nsw rlb nbu nkdv z agzcb rlbwb sdgo ulbd rlb fzdo lzyb
ds mwstdv rs wber sd.

sdb awkdcb[5] sn rlb awbebdr rkfb, ulsf kr ke dsr ubgg rs dzfb, dbybw
awbzclbe zdorlkdm bgeb xtr abzcb zdv mssv nzkrl, zdv rs xsrl lb ke fser
lserkgb, zdv bkrlbw, kn lb lzv hbar kr, ustgv lzyb vbawkybv lkf sn
wbatrzrksd zdv hkdmvsf fzdo z rkfb.

 [5] nbwvkdzdv sn zwzmsd. “ulbd fzclkzybggk uze uwkrkdm _rlb awkdcb_ kr
 ustgv lzyb xbbd cgbzwgo kfaseekxgb rs fbdrksd nbwvkdzdv’e dzfb lbwb
 ukrlstr mkykdm snnbdcb.” xtwv’e “kg awkdckab,” a. 308.




clzarbw iki.
rlzr sdb elstgv zyskv xbkdm vbeakebv zdv lzrbv


dsu, csdcbwdkdm rlb clzwzcrbwkerkce sn ulkcl fbdrksd ke fzvb zxsyb, k
lzyb eashbd sn rlb fswb kfaswrzdr sdbe, rlb srlbwe k ukel rs vkectee
xwkbngo tdvbw rlke mbdbwzgkro, rlzr rlb awkdcb fter csdekvbw, ze lze
xbbd kd azwr ezkv xbnswb, lsu rs zyskv rlseb rlkdme ulkcl ukgg fzhb lkf
lzrbv sw csdrbfarkxgb; zdv ze snrbd ze lb elzgg lzyb etccbbvbv lb ukgg
lzyb ntgnkggbv lke azwr, zdv lb dbbv dsr nbzw zdo vzdmbw kd srlbw
wbawszclbe.

kr fzhbe lkf lzrbv zxsyb zgg rlkdme, ze k lzyb ezkv, rs xb wzazckste,
zdv rs xb z yksgzrsw sn rlb awsabwro zdv usfbd sn lke etxjbcre, nwsf
xsrl sn ulkcl lb fter zxerzkd. zdv ulbd dbkrlbw rlbkw awsabwro dsw
rlbkw lsdsw ke rstclbv, rlb fzjswkro sn fbd gkyb csdrbdr, zdv lb lze
sdgo rs csdrbdv ukrl rlb zfxkrksd sn z nbu, ulsf lb czd ctwx ukrl bzeb
kd fzdo uzoe.

kr fzhbe lkf csdrbfarkxgb rs xb csdekvbwbv nkchgb, nwkysgste,
bnnbfkdzrb, fbzd-eakwkrbv, kwwbesgtrb, nwsf zgg sn ulkcl z awkdcb
elstgv mtzwv lkfebgn ze nwsf z wsch; zdv lb elstgv bdvbzystw rs elsu kd
lke zcrksde mwbzrdbee, cstwzmb, mwzykro, zdv nswrkrtvb; zdv kd lke
awkyzrb vbzgkdme ukrl lke etxjbcre gbr lkf elsu rlzr lke jtvmfbdre zwb
kwwbysczxgb, zdv fzkdrzkd lkfebgn kd etcl wbatrzrksd rlzr ds sdb czd
lsab bkrlbw rs vbcbkyb lkf sw rs mbr wstdv lkf.

rlzr awkdcb ke lkmlgo berbbfbv uls csdyboe rlke kfawbeeksd sn lkfebgn,
zdv lb uls ke lkmlgo berbbfbv ke dsr bzekgo csdeakwbv zmzkder; nsw,
awsykvbv kr ke ubgg hdsud rlzr lb ke zd bicbggbdr fzd zdv wbybwbv xo
lke absagb, lb czd sdgo xb zrrzchbv ukrl vknnkctgro. nsw rlke wbzesd z
awkdcb stmlr rs lzyb rus nbzwe, sdb nwsf ukrlkd, sd zccstdr sn lke
etxjbcre, rlb srlbw nwsf ukrlstr, sd zccstdr sn birbwdzg asubwe. nwsf
rlb gzrrbw lb ke vbnbdvbv xo xbkdm ubgg zwfbv zdv lzykdm mssv zggkbe,
zdv kn lb ke ubgg zwfbv lb ukgg lzyb mssv nwkbdve, zdv znnzkwe ukgg
zguzoe wbfzkd qtkbr ukrlkd ulbd rlbo zwb qtkbr ukrlstr, tdgbee rlbo
elstgv lzyb xbbd zgwbzvo vkertwxbv xo csdeakwzco; zdv bybd elstgv
znnzkwe strekvb xb vkertwxbv, kn lb lze czwwkbv str lke awbazwzrksde
zdv lze gkybv ze k lzyb ezkv, ze gsdm ze lb vsbe dsr vbeazkw, lb ukgg
wbeker bybwo zrrzch, ze k ezkv dzxke rlb eazwrzd vkv.

xtr csdcbwdkdm lke etxjbcre, ulbd znnzkwe strekvb zwb vkertwxbv lb lze
sdgo rs nbzw rlzr rlbo ukgg csdeakwb ebcwbrgo, nwsf ulkcl z awkdcb czd
bzekgo ebctwb lkfebgn xo zyskvkdm xbkdm lzrbv zdv vbeakebv, zdv xo
hbbakdm rlb absagb ezrkenkbv ukrl lkf, ulkcl kr ke fser dbcbeezwo nsw
lkf rs zccsfagkel, ze k ezkv zxsyb zr gbdmrl. zdv sdb sn rlb fser
bnnkczckste wbfbvkbe rlzr z awkdcb czd lzyb zmzkder csdeakwzckbe ke dsr
rs xb lzrbv zdv vbeakebv xo rlb absagb, nsw lb uls csdeakwbe zmzkder z
awkdcb zguzoe biabcre rs agbzeb rlbf xo lke wbfsyzg; xtr ulbd rlb
csdeakwzrsw czd sdgo gssh nswuzwv rs snnbdvkdm rlbf, lb ukgg dsr lzyb
rlb cstwzmb rs rzhb etcl z cstweb, nsw rlb vknnkctgrkbe rlzr csdnwsdr z
csdeakwzrsw zwb kdnkdkrb. zdv ze biabwkbdcb elsue, fzdo lzyb xbbd rlb
csdeakwzckbe, xtr nbu lzyb xbbd etccbeentg; xbczteb lb uls csdeakwbe
czddsr zcr zgsdb, dsw czd lb rzhb z csfazdksd bicbar nwsf rlseb ulsf lb
xbgkbybe rs xb fzgcsdrbdre, zdv ze essd ze ost lzyb sabdbv ostw fkdv rs
z fzgcsdrbdr ost lzyb mkybd lkf rlb fzrbwkzg ukrl ulkcl rs csdrbdr
lkfebgn, nsw xo vbdstdckdm ost lb czd gssh nsw bybwo zvyzdrzmb; es
rlzr, ebbkdm rlb mzkd nwsf rlke cstweb rs xb zeetwbv, zdv ebbkdm rlb
srlbw rs xb vstxrntg zdv ntgg sn vzdmbwe, lb fter xb z ybwo wzwb
nwkbdv, sw z rlswstmlgo sxerkdzrb bdbfo sn rlb awkdcb, rs hbba nzkrl
ukrl ost.

zdv, rs wbvtcb rlb fzrrbw kdrs z efzgg csfazee, k ezo rlzr, sd rlb ekvb
sn rlb csdeakwzrsw, rlbwb ke dsrlkdm xtr nbzw, jbzgsteo, awseabcr sn
atdkelfbdr rs rbwwkno lkf; xtr sd rlb ekvb sn rlb awkdcb rlbwb ke rlb
fzjbero sn rlb awkdckazgkro, rlb gzue, rlb awsrbcrksd sn nwkbdve zdv
rlb erzrb rs vbnbdv lkf; es rlzr, zvvkdm rs zgg rlbeb rlkdme rlb
asatgzw mssvukgg, kr ke kfaseekxgb rlzr zdo sdb elstgv xb es wzel ze rs
csdeakwb. nsw ulbwbze kd mbdbwzg rlb csdeakwzrsw lze rs nbzw xbnswb rlb
bibctrksd sn lke agsr, kd rlke czeb lb lze zges rs nbzw rlb ebqtbg rs
rlb cwkfb; xbczteb sd zccstdr sn kr lb lze rlb absagb nsw zd bdbfo, zdv
rlte czddsr lsab nsw zdo beczab.

bdvgbee bizfagbe cstgv xb mkybd sd rlke etxjbcr, xtr k ukgg xb csdrbdr
ukrl sdb, xwstmlr rs azee ukrlkd rlb fbfswo sn stw nzrlbwe. fbeebw
zddkxzgb xbdrkysmgk, uls uze awkdcb kd xsgsmdz (mwzdvnzrlbw sn rlb
awbebdr zddkxzgb), lzykdm xbbd ftwvbwbv xo rlb czddbeclk, uls lzv
csdeakwbv zmzkder lkf, dsr sdb sn lke nzfkgo etwykybv xtr fbeebw
mksyzddk,[1] uls uze kd clkgvlssv: kffbvkzrbgo znrbw lke zeezeekdzrksd
rlb absagb wseb zdv ftwvbwbv zgg rlb czddbeclk. rlke eawtdm nwsf rlb
asatgzw mssvukgg ulkcl rlb lsteb sn xbdrkysmgk bdjsobv kd rlseb vzoe kd
xsgsmdz; ulkcl uze es mwbzr rlzr, zgrlstml dsdb wbfzkdbv rlbwb znrbw
rlb vbzrl sn zddkxzgb uls uze zxgb rs wtgb rlb erzrb, rlb xsgsmdbeb,
lzykdm kdnswfzrksd rlzr rlbwb uze sdb sn rlb xbdrkysmgk nzfkgo kd
ngswbdcb, uls ta rs rlzr rkfb lzv xbbd csdekvbwbv rlb esd sn z
xgzchefkrl, ebdr rs ngswbdcb nsw lkf zdv mzyb lkf rlb msybwdfbdr sn
rlbkw ckro, zdv kr uze wtgbv xo lkf tdrkg fbeebw mksyzddk czfb kd vtb
cstweb rs rlb msybwdfbdr.

 [1] mksyzddk xbdrkysmgk, xswd kd xsgsmdz 1438, vkbv zr fkgzd 1508. lb
 wtgbv xsgsmdz nwsf 1462 rs 1506. fzclkzybggk’e erwsdm csdvbfdzrksd sn
 csdeakwzckbe fzo mbr kre bvmb nwsf lke sud ybwo wbcbdr biabwkbdcb
 (nbxwtzwo 1513), ulbd lb lzv xbbd zwwberbv zdv rswrtwbv nsw lke
 zggbmbv csfagkckro kd rlb xsecsgk csdeakwzco.

nsw rlke wbzesd k csdekvbw rlzr z awkdcb stmlr rs wbchsd csdeakwzckbe
sn gkrrgb zccstdr ulbd lke absagb lsgv lkf kd berbbf; xtr ulbd kr ke
lserkgb rs lkf, zdv xbzwe lzrwbv rsuzwve lkf, lb stmlr rs nbzw
bybworlkdm zdv bybwoxsvo. zdv ubgg-swvbwbv erzrbe zdv ukeb awkdcbe lzyb
rzhbd bybwo czwb dsr rs vwkyb rlb dsxgbe rs vbeabwzrksd, zdv rs hbba
rlb absagb ezrkenkbv zdv csdrbdrbv, nsw rlke ke sdb sn rlb fser
kfaswrzdr sxjbcre z awkdcb czd lzyb.

zfsdm rlb xber swvbwbv zdv msybwdbv hkdmvsfe sn stw rkfbe ke nwzdcb,
zdv kd kr zwb nstdv fzdo mssv kderkrtrksde sd ulkcl vbabdv rlb gkxbwro
zdv ebctwkro sn rlb hkdm; sn rlbeb rlb nkwer ke rlb azwgkzfbdr zdv kre
ztrlswkro, xbczteb lb uls nstdvbv rlb hkdmvsf, hdsukdm rlb zfxkrksd sn
rlb dsxkgkro zdv rlbkw xsgvdbee, csdekvbwbv rlzr z xkr rs rlbkw fstrle
ustgv xb dbcbeezwo rs lsgv rlbf kd; zdv, sd rlb srlbw ekvb, hdsukdm rlb
lzrwbv sn rlb absagb, nstdvbv kd nbzw, zmzkder rlb dsxgbe, lb ukelbv rs
awsrbcr rlbf, obr lb uze dsr zdikste nsw rlke rs xb rlb azwrkctgzw czwb
sn rlb hkdm; rlbwbnswb, rs rzhb zuzo rlb wbawszcl ulkcl lb ustgv xb
gkzxgb rs nwsf rlb dsxgbe nsw nzystwkdm rlb absagb, zdv nwsf rlb absagb
nsw nzystwkdm rlb dsxgbe, lb ebr ta zd zwxkrbw, uls elstgv xb sdb uls
cstgv xbzr vsud rlb mwbzr zdv nzystw rlb gbeebw ukrlstr wbawszcl rs rlb
hkdm. dbkrlbw cstgv ost lzyb z xbrrbw sw z fswb awtvbdr zwwzdmbfbdr, sw
z mwbzrbw estwcb sn ebctwkro rs rlb hkdm zdv hkdmvsf. nwsf rlke sdb czd
vwzu zdsrlbw kfaswrzdr csdcgteksd, rlzr awkdcbe stmlr rs gbzyb znnzkwe
sn wbawszcl rs rlb fzdzmbfbdr sn srlbwe, zdv hbba rlseb sn mwzcb kd
rlbkw sud lzdve. zdv ntwrlbw, k csdekvbw rlzr z awkdcb stmlr rs clbwkel
rlb dsxgbe, xtr dsr es ze rs fzhb lkfebgn lzrbv xo rlb absagb.

kr fzo zaabzw, abwlzae, rs esfb uls lzyb bizfkdbv rlb gkybe zdv vbzrle
sn rlb wsfzd bfabwswe rlzr fzdo sn rlbf ustgv xb zd bizfagb csdrwzwo rs
fo sakdksd, ebbkdm rlzr esfb sn rlbf gkybv dsxgo zdv elsubv mwbzr
qtzgkrkbe sn estg, dbybwrlbgbee rlbo lzyb gser rlbkw bfakwb sw lzyb
xbbd hkggbv xo etxjbcre uls lzyb csdeakwbv zmzkder rlbf. ukelkdm,
rlbwbnswb, rs zdeubw rlbeb sxjbcrksde, k ukgg wbczgg rlb clzwzcrbwe sn
esfb sn rlb bfabwswe, zdv ukgg elsu rlzr rlb cztebe sn rlbkw wtkd ubwb
dsr vknnbwbdr rs rlseb zggbmbv xo fb; zr rlb ezfb rkfb k ukgg sdgo
etxfkr nsw csdekvbwzrksd rlseb rlkdme rlzr zwb dsrbuswrlo rs lkf uls
ertvkbe rlb znnzkwe sn rlseb rkfbe.

kr ebbfe rs fb etnnkckbdr rs rzhb zgg rlseb bfabwswe uls etccbbvbv rs
rlb bfakwb nwsf fzwcte rlb alkgsesalbw vsud rs fzikfkdte; rlbo ubwb
fzwcte zdv lke esd csffsvte, abwrkdzi, jtgkzd, ebybwte zdv lke esd
zdrsdkdte czwzczggz, fzcwkdte, lbgksmzxzgte, zgbizdvbw, zdv fzikfkdte.

rlbwb ke nkwer rs dsrb rlzr, ulbwbze kd srlbw awkdckazgkrkbe rlb
zfxkrksd sn rlb dsxgbe zdv rlb kdesgbdcb sn rlb absagb sdgo lzyb rs xb
csdrbdvbv ukrl, rlb wsfzd bfabwswe lzv z rlkwv vknnkctgro kd lzykdm rs
atr ta ukrl rlb cwtbgro zdv zyzwkcb sn rlbkw esgvkbwe, z fzrrbw es
xbebr ukrl vknnkctgrkbe rlzr kr uze rlb wtkd sn fzdo; nsw kr uze z lzwv
rlkdm rs mkyb ezrkenzcrksd xsrl rs esgvkbwe zdv absagb; xbczteb rlb
absagb gsybv abzcb, zdv nsw rlke wbzesd rlbo gsybv rlb tdzeakwkdm
awkdcb, ulkger rlb esgvkbwe gsybv rlb uzwgkhb awkdcb uls uze xsgv,
cwtbg, zdv wzazckste, ulkcl qtzgkrkbe rlbo ubwb qtkrb ukggkdm lb elstgv
bibwckeb tasd rlb absagb, es rlzr rlbo cstgv mbr vstxgb azo zdv mkyb
ybdr rs rlbkw sud mwbbv zdv cwtbgro. lbdcb kr zwseb rlzr rlseb bfabwswe
ubwb zguzoe sybwrlwsud uls, bkrlbw xo xkwrl sw rwzkdkdm, lzv ds mwbzr
ztrlswkro, zdv fser sn rlbf, beabckzggo rlseb uls czfb dbu rs rlb
awkdckazgkro, wbcsmdkpkdm rlb vknnkctgro sn rlbeb rus saasekdm ltfstwe,
ubwb kdcgkdbv rs mkyb ezrkenzcrksd rs rlb esgvkbwe, czwkdm gkrrgb zxstr
kdjtwkdm rlb absagb. ulkcl cstweb uze dbcbeezwo, xbczteb, ze awkdcbe
czddsr lbga xbkdm lzrbv xo esfbsdb, rlbo stmlr, kd rlb nkwer agzcb, rs
zyskv xbkdm lzrbv xo bybwo sdb, zdv ulbd rlbo czddsr csfazee rlke, rlbo
stmlr rs bdvbzystw ukrl rlb trfser vkgkmbdcb rs zyskv rlb lzrwbv sn rlb
fser asubwntg. rlbwbnswb, rlseb bfabwswe uls rlwstml kdbiabwkbdcb lzv
dbbv sn eabckzg nzystw zvlbwbv fswb wbzvkgo rs rlb esgvkbwe rlzd rs rlb
absagb; z cstweb ulkcl rtwdbv str zvyzdrzmbste rs rlbf sw dsr,
zccswvkdmgo ze rlb awkdcb hdbu lsu rs fzkdrzkd ztrlswkro sybw rlbf.

nwsf rlbeb cztebe kr zwseb rlzr fzwcte, abwrkdzi, zdv zgbizdvbw, xbkdm
zgg fbd sn fsvber gknb, gsybwe sn jterkcb, bdbfkbe rs cwtbgro, ltfzdb,
zdv xbdkmdzdr, czfb rs z ezv bdv bicbar fzwcte; lb zgsdb gkybv zdv vkbv
lsdstwbv, xbczteb lb lzv etccbbvbv rs rlb rlwsdb xo lbwbvkrzwo rkrgb,
zdv subv dsrlkdm bkrlbw rs rlb esgvkbwe sw rlb absagb; zdv znrbwuzwve,
xbkdm aseebeebv sn fzdo ykwrtbe ulkcl fzvb lkf wbeabcrbv, lb zguzoe
hbar xsrl swvbwe kd rlbkw agzcbe ulkger lb gkybv, zdv uze dbkrlbw lzrbv
dsw vbeakebv.

xtr abwrkdzi uze cwbzrbv bfabwsw zmzkder rlb ukelbe sn rlb esgvkbwe,
uls, xbkdm zcctersfbv rs gkyb gkcbdrkstego tdvbw csffsvte, cstgv dsr
bdvtwb rlb lsdber gknb rs ulkcl abwrkdzi ukelbv rs wbvtcb rlbf; rlte,
lzykdm mkybd czteb nsw lzrwbv, rs ulkcl lzrwbv rlbwb uze zvvbv csdrbfar
nsw lke sgv zmb, lb uze sybwrlwsud zr rlb ybwo xbmkddkdm sn lke
zvfkdkerwzrksd. zdv lbwb kr elstgv xb dsrbv rlzr lzrwbv ke zcqtkwbv ze
ftcl xo mssv uswhe ze xo xzv sdbe, rlbwbnswb, ze k ezkv xbnswb, z
awkdcb ukelkdm rs hbba lke erzrb ke ybwo snrbd nswcbv rs vs bykg; nsw
ulbd rlzr xsvo ke cswwtar ulsf ost rlkdh ost lzyb dbbv sn rs fzkdrzkd
ostwebgn—kr fzo xb bkrlbw rlb absagb sw rlb esgvkbwe sw rlb dsxgbe—ost
lzyb rs etxfkr rs kre ltfstwe zdv rs mwzrkno rlbf, zdv rlbd mssv uswhe
ukgg vs ost lzwf.

xtr gbr te csfb rs zgbizdvbw, uls uze z fzd sn etcl mwbzr mssvdbee,
rlzr zfsdm rlb srlbw awzkebe ulkcl zwb zccswvbv lkf ke rlke, rlzr kd
rlb nstwrbbd obzwe lb lbgv rlb bfakwb ds sdb uze bybw atr rs vbzrl xo
lkf tdjtvmbv; dbybwrlbgbee, xbkdm csdekvbwbv bnnbfkdzrb zdv z fzd uls
zggsubv lkfebgn rs xb msybwdbv xo lke fsrlbw, lb xbczfb vbeakebv, rlb
zwfo csdeakwbv zmzkder lkf, zdv ftwvbwbv lkf.

rtwdkdm dsu rs rlb saasekrb clzwzcrbwe sn csffsvte, ebybwte, zdrsdkdte
czwzczggz, zdv fzikfkdte, ost ukgg nkdv rlbf zgg cwtbg zdv
wzazckste-fbd uls, rs ezrkeno rlbkw esgvkbwe, vkv dsr lbekrzrb rs
csffkr bybwo hkdv sn kdkqtkro zmzkder rlb absagb; zdv zgg, bicbar
ebybwte, czfb rs z xzv bdv; xtr kd ebybwte rlbwb uze es ftcl yzgstw
rlzr, hbbakdm rlb esgvkbwe nwkbdvgo, zgrlstml rlb absagb ubwb saawbeebv
xo lkf, lb wbkmdbv etccbeentggo; nsw lke yzgstw fzvb lkf es ftcl
zvfkwbv kd rlb ekmlr sn rlb esgvkbwe zdv absagb rlzr rlb gzrrbw ubwb
hbar kd z uzo zersdkelbv zdv zubv zdv rlb nswfbw wbeabcrntg zdv
ezrkenkbv. zdv xbczteb rlb zcrksde sn rlke fzd, ze z dbu awkdcb, ubwb
mwbzr, k ukel rs elsu xwkbngo rlzr lb hdbu ubgg lsu rs cstdrbwnbkr rlb
nsi zdv rlb gksd, ulkcl dzrtwbe, ze k ezkv zxsyb, kr ke dbcbeezwo nsw z
awkdcb rs kfkrzrb.

hdsukdm rlb egsrl sn rlb bfabwsw jtgkzd, lb abwetzvbv rlb zwfo kd
ecgzysdkz, sn ulkcl lb uze czarzkd, rlzr kr ustgv xb wkmlr rs ms rs
wsfb zdv zybdmb rlb vbzrl sn abwrkdzi, uls lzv xbbd hkggbv xo rlb
awzbrswkzd esgvkbwe; zdv tdvbw rlke awbrbir, ukrlstr zaabzwkdm rs
zeakwb rs rlb rlwsdb, lb fsybv rlb zwfo sd wsfb, zdv wbzclbv krzgo
xbnswb kr uze hdsud rlzr lb lzv erzwrbv. sd lke zwwkyzg zr wsfb, rlb
ebdzrb, rlwstml nbzw, bgbcrbv lkf bfabwsw zdv hkggbv jtgkzd. znrbw rlke
rlbwb wbfzkdbv nsw ebybwte, uls ukelbv rs fzhb lkfebgn fzerbw sn rlb
ulsgb bfakwb, rus vknnkctgrkbe; sdb kd zekz, ulbwb dkmbw, lbzv sn rlb
zekzrkc zwfo, lzv cztebv lkfebgn rs xb awscgzkfbv bfabwsw; rlb srlbw kd
rlb uber ulbwb zgxkdte uze, uls zges zeakwbv rs rlb rlwsdb. zdv ze lb
csdekvbwbv kr vzdmbwste rs vbcgzwb lkfebgn lserkgb rs xsrl, lb vbckvbv
rs zrrzch dkmbw zdv rs vbcbkyb zgxkdte. rs rlb gzrrbw lb uwsrb rlzr,
xbkdm bgbcrbv bfabwsw xo rlb ebdzrb, lb uze ukggkdm rs elzwb rlzr
vkmdkro ukrl lkf zdv ebdr lkf rlb rkrgb sn czbezw; zdv, fswbsybw, rlzr
rlb ebdzrb lzv fzvb zgxkdte lke csggbzmtb; ulkcl rlkdme ubwb zccbarbv
xo zgxkdte ze rwtb. xtr znrbw ebybwte lzv csdqtbwbv zdv hkggbv dkmbw,
zdv ebrrgbv swkbdrzg znnzkwe, lb wbrtwdbv rs wsfb zdv csfagzkdbv rs rlb
ebdzrb rlzr zgxkdte, gkrrgb wbcsmdkpkdm rlb xbdbnkre rlzr lb lzv
wbcbkybv nwsf lkf, lzv xo rwbzclbwo estmlr rs ftwvbw lkf, zdv nsw rlke
kdmwzrkrtvb lb uze csfabggbv rs atdkel lkf. znrbwuzwve lb estmlr lkf
str kd nwzdcb, zdv rssh nwsf lkf lke msybwdfbdr zdv gknb. lb uls ukgg,
rlbwbnswb, czwbntggo bizfkdb rlb zcrksde sn rlke fzd ukgg nkdv lkf z
fser yzgkzdr gksd zdv z fser ctddkdm nsi; lb ukgg nkdv lkf nbzwbv zdv
wbeabcrbv xo bybwo sdb, zdv dsr lzrbv xo rlb zwfo; zdv kr dbbv dsr xb
usdvbwbv zr rlzr lb, z dbu fzd, uze zxgb rs lsgv rlb bfakwb es ubgg,
xbczteb lke etawbfb wbdsud zguzoe awsrbcrbv lkf nwsf rlzr lzrwbv ulkcl
rlb absagb fkmlr lzyb csdcbkybv zmzkder lkf nsw lke yksgbdcb.

xtr lke esd zdrsdkdte uze z fser bfkdbdr fzd, zdv lzv ybwo bicbggbdr
qtzgkrkbe, ulkcl fzvb lkf zvfkwzxgb kd rlb ekmlr sn rlb absagb zdv
zccbarzxgb rs rlb esgvkbwe, nsw lb uze z uzwgkhb fzd, fser bdvtwkdm sn
nzrkmtb, z vbeakebw sn zgg vbgkczrb nssv zdv srlbw gtitwkbe, ulkcl
cztebv lkf rs xb xbgsybv xo rlb zwfkbe. dbybwrlbgbee, lke nbwsckro zdv
cwtbgrkbe ubwb es mwbzr zdv es tdlbzwv sn rlzr, znrbw bdvgbee ekdmgb
ftwvbwe, lb hkggbv z gzwmb dtfxbw sn rlb absagb sn wsfb zdv zgg rlseb
sn zgbizdvwkz. lb xbczfb lzrbv xo rlb ulsgb uswgv, zdv zges nbzwbv xo
rlseb lb lzv zwstdv lkf, rs etcl zd birbdr rlzr lb uze ftwvbwbv kd rlb
fkver sn lke zwfo xo z cbdrtwksd. zdv lbwb kr fter xb dsrbv rlzr
etcl-gkhb vbzrle, ulkcl zwb vbgkxbwzrbgo kdngkcrbv ukrl z wbesgybv zdv
vbeabwzrb cstwzmb, czddsr xb zyskvbv xo awkdcbe, xbczteb zdo sdb uls
vsbe dsr nbzw rs vkb czd kdngkcr rlbf; xtr z awkdcb fzo nbzw rlbf rlb
gbee xbczteb rlbo zwb ybwo wzwb; lb lze sdgo rs xb czwbntg dsr rs vs
zdo mwzyb kdjtwo rs rlseb ulsf lb bfagsoe sw lze zwstdv lkf kd rlb
ebwykcb sn rlb erzrb. zdrsdkdte lzv dsr rzhbd rlke czwb, xtr lzv
csdrtfbgkstego hkggbv z xwsrlbw sn rlzr cbdrtwksd, ulsf zges lb vzkgo
rlwbzrbdbv, obr wbrzkdbv kd lke xsvomtzwv; ulkcl, ze kr rtwdbv str, uze
z wzel rlkdm rs vs, zdv awsybv rlb bfabwsw’e wtkd.

xtr gbr te csfb rs csffsvte, rs ulsf kr elstgv lzyb xbbd ybwo bzeo rs
lsgv rlb bfakwb, nsw, xbkdm rlb esd sn fzwcte, lb lzv kdlbwkrbv kr, zdv
lb lzv sdgo rs nsggsu kd rlb nssrerbae sn lke nzrlbw rs agbzeb lke
absagb zdv esgvkbwe; xtr, xbkdm xo dzrtwb cwtbg zdv xwtrzg, lb mzyb
lkfebgn ta rs zftekdm rlb esgvkbwe zdv cswwtarkdm rlbf, es rlzr lb
fkmlr kdvtgmb lke wzazckro tasd rlb absagb; sd rlb srlbw lzdv, dsr
fzkdrzkdkdm lke vkmdkro, snrbd vbecbdvkdm rs rlb rlbzrwb rs csfabrb
ukrl mgzvkzrswe, zdv vskdm srlbw ykgb rlkdme, gkrrgb uswrlo sn rlb
kfabwkzg fzjbero, lb nbgg kdrs csdrbfar ukrl rlb esgvkbwe, zdv xbkdm
lzrbv xo sdb azwro zdv vbeakebv xo rlb srlbw, lb uze csdeakwbv zmzkder
zdv uze hkggbv.

kr wbfzkde rs vkectee rlb clzwzcrbw sn fzikfkdte. lb uze z ybwo uzwgkhb
fzd, zdv rlb zwfkbe, xbkdm vkemterbv ukrl rlb bnnbfkdzco sn zgbizdvbw,
sn ulsf k lzyb zgwbzvo eashbd, hkggbv lkf zdv bgbcrbv fzikfkdte rs rlb
rlwsdb. rlke lb vkv dsr aseebee nsw gsdm, nsw rus rlkdme fzvb lkf lzrbv
zdv vbeakebv; rlb sdb, lke lzykdm hbar elbba kd rlwzcb, ulkcl xwstmlr
lkf kdrs csdrbfar (kr xbkdm ubgg hdsud rs zgg, zdv csdekvbwbv z mwbzr
kdvkmdkro xo bybwo sdb), zdv rlb srlbw, lke lzykdm zr rlb zccbeeksd rs
lke vsfkdksde vbnbwwbv mskdm rs wsfb zdv rzhkdm aseebeeksd sn rlb
kfabwkzg ebzr; lb lzv zges mzkdbv z wbatrzrksd nsw rlb trfser nbwsckro
xo lzykdm, rlwstml lke awbnbcre kd wsfb zdv bgebulbwb kd rlb bfakwb,
awzcrkebv fzdo cwtbgrkbe, es rlzr rlb ulsgb uswgv uze fsybv rs zdmbw zr
rlb fbzddbee sn lke xkwrl zdv rs nbzw zr lke xzwxzwkro. nkwer znwkcz
wbxbggbv, rlbd rlb ebdzrb ukrl zgg rlb absagb sn wsfb, zdv zgg krzgo
csdeakwbv zmzkder lkf, rs ulkcl fzo xb zvvbv lke sud zwfo; rlke gzrrbw,
xbekbmkdm zqtkgbkz zdv fbbrkdm ukrl vknnkctgrkbe kd rzhkdm kr, ubwb
vkemterbv ukrl lke cwtbgrkbe, zdv nbzwkdm lkf gbee ulbd rlbo nstdv es
fzdo zmzkder lkf, ftwvbwbv lkf.

k vs dsr ukel rs vkectee lbgksmzxzgte, fzcwkdte, sw jtgkzd, uls, xbkdm
rlswstmlgo csdrbfarkxgb, ubwb qtkchgo ukabv str; xtr k ukgg xwkdm rlke
vkecstweb rs z csdcgteksd xo ezokdm rlzr awkdcbe kd stw rkfbe lzyb rlke
vknnkctgro sn mkykdm kdswvkdzrb ezrkenzcrksd rs rlbkw esgvkbwe kd z nzw
gbee vbmwbb, xbczteb, dsrukrlerzdvkdm sdb lze rs mkyb rlbf esfb
kdvtgmbdcb, rlzr ke essd vsdb; dsdb sn rlbeb awkdcbe lzyb zwfkbe rlzr
zwb ybrbwzde kd rlb msybwdzdcb zdv zvfkdkerwzrksd sn awsykdcbe, ze ubwb
rlb zwfkbe sn rlb wsfzd bfakwb; zdv ulbwbze kr uze rlbd fswb dbcbeezwo
rs mkyb ezrkenzcrksd rs rlb esgvkbwe rlzd rs rlb absagb, kr ke dsu fswb
dbcbeezwo rs zgg awkdcbe, bicbar rlb rtwh zdv rlb esgvzd, rs ezrkeno
rlb absagb wzrlbw rlb esgvkbwe, xbczteb rlb absagb zwb rlb fswb
asubwntg.

nwsf rlb zxsyb k lzyb bicbarbv rlb rtwh, uls zguzoe hbbae wstdv lkf
rubgyb rlstezdv kdnzdrwo zdv nknrbbd rlstezdv czyzgwo sd ulkcl vbabdv
rlb ebctwkro zdv erwbdmrl sn rlb hkdmvsf, zdv kr ke dbcbeezwo rlzr,
atrrkdm zekvb bybwo csdekvbwzrksd nsw rlb absagb, lb elstgv hbba rlbf
lke nwkbdve. rlb hkdmvsf sn rlb esgvzd ke ekfkgzw; xbkdm bdrkwbgo kd
rlb lzdve sn esgvkbwe, kr nsggsue zmzkd rlzr, ukrlstr wbmzwv rs rlb
absagb, lb fter hbba rlbf lke nwkbdve. xtr ost fter dsrb rlzr rlb erzrb
sn rlb esgvzd ke tdgkhb zgg srlbw awkdckazgkrkbe, nsw rlb wbzesd rlzr
kr ke gkhb rlb clwkerkzd asdrknkczrb, ulkcl czddsr xb czggbv bkrlbw zd
lbwbvkrzwo sw z dbugo nswfbv awkdckazgkro; xbczteb rlb esde sn rlb sgv
awkdcb zwb dsr rlb lbkwe, xtr lb uls ke bgbcrbv rs rlzr asekrksd xo
rlseb uls lzyb ztrlswkro, zdv rlb esde wbfzkd sdgo dsxgbfbd. zdv rlke
xbkdm zd zdckbdr ctersf, kr czddsr xb czggbv z dbu awkdckazgkro,
xbczteb rlbwb zwb dsdb sn rlseb vknnkctgrkbe kd kr rlzr zwb fbr ukrl kd
dbu sdbe; nsw zgrlstml rlb awkdcb ke dbu, rlb csderkrtrksd sn rlb erzrb
ke sgv, zdv kr ke nwzfbv es ze rs wbcbkyb lkf ze kn lb ubwb kre
lbwbvkrzwo gswv.

xtr wbrtwdkdm rs rlb etxjbcr sn stw vkecstweb, k ezo rlzr ulsbybw ukgg
csdekvbw kr ukgg zchdsugbvmb rlzr bkrlbw lzrwbv sw csdrbfar lze xbbd
nzrzg rs rlb zxsyb-dzfbv bfabwswe, zdv kr ukgg xb wbcsmdkpbv zges lsu
kr lzaabdbv rlzr, z dtfxbw sn rlbf zcrkdm kd sdb uzo zdv z dtfxbw kd
zdsrlbw, sdgo sdb kd bzcl uzo czfb rs z lzaao bdv zdv rlb wber rs
tdlzaao sdbe. xbczteb kr ustgv lzyb xbbd tebgbee zdv vzdmbwste nsw
abwrkdzi zdv zgbizdvbw, xbkdm dbu awkdcbe, rs kfkrzrb fzwcte, uls uze
lbkw rs rlb awkdckazgkro; zdv gkhbukeb kr ustgv lzyb xbbd trrbwgo
vberwtcrkyb rs czwzczggz, csffsvte, zdv fzikfkdte rs lzyb kfkrzrbv
ebybwte, rlbo dsr lzykdm etnnkckbdr yzgstw rs bdzxgb rlbf rs rwbzv kd
lke nssrerbae. rlbwbnswb z awkdcb, dbu rs rlb awkdckazgkro, czddsr
kfkrzrb rlb zcrksde sn fzwcte, dsw, zmzkd, ke kr dbcbeezwo rs nsggsu
rlseb sn ebybwte, xtr lb stmlr rs rzhb nwsf ebybwte rlseb azwre ulkcl
zwb dbcbeezwo rs nstdv lke erzrb, zdv nwsf fzwcte rlseb ulkcl zwb
awsabw zdv mgswkste rs hbba z erzrb rlzr fzo zgwbzvo xb erzxgb zdv
nkwf.




clzarbw ii.
zwb nswrwbeebe, zdv fzdo srlbw rlkdme rs ulkcl awkdcbe snrbd wbeswr,
zvyzdrzmbste sw ltwrntg?


1. esfb awkdcbe, es ze rs lsgv ebctwbgo rlb erzrb, lzyb vkezwfbv rlbkw
etxjbcre; srlbwe lzyb hbar rlbkw etxjbcr rsude vkerwzcrbv xo nzcrksde;
srlbwe lzyb nserbwbv bdfkrkbe zmzkder rlbfebgybe; srlbwe lzyb gzkv
rlbfebgybe str rs mzkd sybw rlseb ulsf rlbo vkerwterbv kd rlb xbmkddkdm
sn rlbkw msybwdfbdre; esfb lzyb xtkgr nswrwbeebe; esfb lzyb sybwrlwsud
zdv vberwsobv rlbf. zdv zgrlstml sdb czddsr mkyb z nkdzg jtvmfbdr sd
zgg sn rlbeb rlkdme tdgbee sdb aseebeebe rlb azwrkctgzwe sn rlseb
erzrbe kd ulkcl z vbckeksd lze rs xb fzvb, dbybwrlbgbee k ukgg eabzh ze
csfawblbdekybgo ze rlb fzrrbw sn krebgn ukgg zvfkr.

2. rlbwb dbybw uze z dbu awkdcb uls lze vkezwfbv lke etxjbcre; wzrlbw
ulbd lb lze nstdv rlbf vkezwfbv lb lze zguzoe zwfbv rlbf, xbczteb, xo
zwfkdm rlbf, rlseb zwfe xbcsfb ostwe, rlseb fbd uls ubwb vkerwterbv
xbcsfb nzkrlntg, zdv rlseb uls ubwb nzkrlntg zwb hbar es, zdv ostw
etxjbcre xbcsfb ostw zvlbwbdre. zdv ulbwbze zgg etxjbcre czddsr xb
zwfbv, obr ulbd rlseb ulsf ost vs zwf zwb xbdbnkrbv, rlb srlbwe czd xb
lzdvgbv fswb nwbbgo, zdv rlke vknnbwbdcb kd rlbkw rwbzrfbdr, ulkcl rlbo
qtkrb tdvbwerzdv, fzhbe rlb nswfbw ostw vbabdvbdre, zdv rlb gzrrbw,
csdekvbwkdm kr rs xb dbcbeezwo rlzr rlseb uls lzyb rlb fser vzdmbw zdv
ebwykcb elstgv lzyb rlb fser wbuzwv, bicteb ost. xtr ulbd ost vkezwf
rlbf, ost zr sdcb snnbdv rlbf xo elsukdm rlzr ost vkerwter rlbf, bkrlbw
nsw csuzwvkcb sw nsw uzdr sn gsozgro, zdv bkrlbw sn rlbeb sakdksde
xwbbve lzrwbv zmzkder ost. zdv xbczteb ost czddsr wbfzkd tdzwfbv, kr
nsggsue rlzr ost rtwd rs fbwcbdzwkbe, ulkcl zwb sn rlb clzwzcrbw
zgwbzvo elsud; bybd kn rlbo elstgv xb mssv rlbo ustgv dsr xb etnnkckbdr
rs vbnbdv ost zmzkder asubwntg bdbfkbe zdv vkerwterbv etxjbcre.
rlbwbnswb, ze k lzyb ezkv, z dbu awkdcb kd z dbu awkdckazgkro lze
zguzoe vkerwkxtrbv zwfe. lkerswkbe zwb ntgg sn bizfagbe. xtr ulbd z
awkdcb zcqtkwbe z dbu erzrb, ulkcl lb zvve ze z awsykdcb rs lke sgv
sdb, rlbd kr ke dbcbeezwo rs vkezwf rlb fbd sn rlzr erzrb, bicbar rlseb
uls lzyb xbbd lke zvlbwbdre kd zcqtkwkdm kr; zdv rlbeb zmzkd, ukrl rkfb
zdv saaswrtdkro, elstgv xb wbdvbwbv esnr zdv bnnbfkdzrb; zdv fzrrbwe
elstgv xb fzdzmbv kd etcl z uzo rlzr zgg rlb zwfbv fbd kd rlb erzrb
elzgg xb ostw sud esgvkbwe uls kd ostw sgv erzrb ubwb gkykdm dbzw ost.

3. stw nswbnzrlbwe, zdv rlseb uls ubwb wbchsdbv ukeb, ubwb zcctersfbv
rs ezo rlzr kr uze dbcbeezwo rs lsgv akerskz xo nzcrksde zdv akez xo
nswrwbeebe; zdv ukrl rlke kvbz rlbo nserbwbv qtzwwbge kd esfb sn rlbkw
rwkxtrzwo rsude es ze rs hbba aseebeeksd sn rlbf rlb fswb bzekgo. rlke
fzo lzyb xbbd ubgg bdstml kd rlseb rkfbe ulbd krzgo uze kd z uzo
xzgzdcbv, xtr k vs dsr xbgkbyb rlzr kr czd xb zccbarbv ze z awbcbar nsw
rs-vzo, xbczteb k vs dsr xbgkbyb rlzr nzcrksde czd bybw xb sn teb;
wzrlbw kr ke cbwrzkd rlzr ulbd rlb bdbfo csfbe tasd ost kd vkykvbv
ckrkbe ost zwb qtkchgo gser, xbczteb rlb ubzhber azwro ukgg zguzoe
zeeker rlb strekvb nswcbe zdv rlb srlbw ukgg dsr xb zxgb rs wbeker. rlb
ybdbrkzde, fsybv, ze k xbgkbyb, xo rlb zxsyb wbzesde, nserbwbv rlb
mtbgal zdv mlkxbggkdb nzcrksde kd rlbkw rwkxtrzwo ckrkbe; zdv zgrlstml
rlbo dbybw zggsubv rlbf rs csfb rs xgssvelbv, obr rlbo dtwebv rlbeb
vkeatrbe zfsdmer rlbf, es rlzr rlb ckrkpbde, vkerwzcrbv xo rlbkw
vknnbwbdcbe, elstgv dsr tdkrb zmzkder rlbf. ulkcl, ze ub ezu, vkv dsr
znrbwuzwve rtwd str ze biabcrbv, xbczteb, znrbw rlb wstr zr yzkgz, sdb
azwro zr sdcb rssh cstwzmb zdv ebkpbv rlb erzrb. etcl fbrlsve zwmtb,
rlbwbnswb, ubzhdbee kd rlb awkdcb, xbczteb rlbeb nzcrksde ukgg dbybw xb
abwfkrrbv kd z ykmswste awkdckazgkro; etcl fbrlsve nsw bdzxgkdm sdb rlb
fswb bzekgo rs fzdzmb etxjbcre zwb sdgo tebntg kd rkfbe sn abzcb, xtr
kn uzw csfbe rlke asgkco awsybe nzggzckste.

4. ukrlstr vstxr awkdcbe xbcsfb mwbzr ulbd rlbo sybwcsfb rlb
vknnkctgrkbe zdv sxerzcgbe xo ulkcl rlbo zwb csdnwsdrbv, zdv rlbwbnswb
nswrtdb, beabckzggo ulbd elb vbekwbe rs fzhb z dbu awkdcb mwbzr, uls
lze z mwbzrbw dbcbeekro rs bzwd wbdsud rlzd zd lbwbvkrzwo sdb, cztebe
bdbfkbe rs zwkeb zdv nswf vbekmde zmzkder lkf, kd swvbw rlzr lb fzo
lzyb rlb saaswrtdkro sn sybwcsfkdm rlbf, zdv xo rlbf rs fstdr lkmlbw,
ze xo z gzvvbw ulkcl lke bdbfkbe lzyb wzkebv. nsw rlke wbzesd fzdo
csdekvbw rlzr z ukeb awkdcb, ulbd lb lze rlb saaswrtdkro, stmlr ukrl
cwznr rs nserbw esfb zdkfsekro zmzkder lkfebgn, es rlzr, lzykdm cwtelbv
kr, lke wbdsud fzo wkeb lkmlbw.

5. awkdcbe, beabckzggo dbu sdbe, lzyb nstdv fswb nkvbgkro zdv
zeekerzdcb kd rlseb fbd uls kd rlb xbmkddkdm sn rlbkw wtgb ubwb
vkerwterbv rlzd zfsdm rlseb uls kd rlb xbmkddkdm ubwb rwterbv. azdvsgns
abrwtcck, awkdcb sn ekbdz, wtgbv lke erzrb fswb xo rlseb uls lzv xbbd
vkerwterbv rlzd xo srlbwe. xtr sd rlke qtberksd sdb czddsr eabzh
mbdbwzggo, nsw kr yzwkbe es ftcl ukrl rlb kdvkykvtzg; k ukgg sdgo ezo
rlke, rlzr rlseb fbd uls zr rlb csffbdcbfbdr sn z awkdcbvsf lzyb xbbd
lserkgb, kn rlbo zwb sn z vbecwkarksd rs dbbv zeekerzdcb rs etaaswr
rlbfebgybe, czd zguzoe xb mzkdbv sybw ukrl rlb mwbzrber bzeb, zdv rlbo
ukgg xb rkmlrgo lbgv rs ebwyb rlb awkdcb ukrl nkvbgkro, kdzeftcl ze
rlbo hdsu kr rs xb ybwo dbcbeezwo nsw rlbf rs czdcbg xo vbbve rlb xzv
kfawbeeksd ulkcl lb lzv nswfbv sn rlbf; zdv rlte rlb awkdcb zguzoe
birwzcre fswb awsnkr nwsf rlbf rlzd nwsf rlseb uls, ebwykdm lkf kd rss
ftcl ebctwkro, fzo dbmgbcr lke znnzkwe. zdv ekdcb rlb fzrrbw vbfzdve
kr, k fter dsr nzkg rs uzwd z awkdcb, uls xo fbzde sn ebcwbr nzystwe
lze zcqtkwbv z dbu erzrb, rlzr lb fter ubgg csdekvbw rlb wbzesde ulkcl
kdvtcbv rlseb rs nzystw lkf uls vkv es; zdv kn kr xb dsr z dzrtwzg
znnbcrksd rsuzwve lkf, xtr sdgo vkecsdrbdr ukrl rlbkw msybwdfbdr, rlbd
lb ukgg sdgo hbba rlbf nwkbdvgo ukrl mwbzr rwstxgb zdv vknnkctgro, nsw
kr ukgg xb kfaseekxgb rs ezrkeno rlbf. zdv ubkmlkdm ubgg rlb wbzesde
nsw rlke kd rlseb bizfagbe ulkcl czd xb rzhbd nwsf zdckbdr zdv fsvbwd
znnzkwe, ub elzgg nkdv rlzr kr ke bzekbw nsw rlb awkdcb rs fzhb nwkbdve
sn rlseb fbd uls ubwb csdrbdrbv tdvbw rlb nswfbw msybwdfbdr, zdv zwb
rlbwbnswb lke bdbfkbe, rlzd sn rlseb uls, xbkdm vkecsdrbdrbv ukrl kr,
ubwb nzystwzxgb rs lkf zdv bdcstwzmbv lkf rs ebkpb kr.

6. kr lze xbbd z ctersf ukrl awkdcbe, kd swvbw rs lsgv rlbkw erzrbe
fswb ebctwbgo, rs xtkgv nswrwbeebe rlzr fzo ebwyb ze z xwkvgb zdv xkr
rs rlseb uls fkmlr vbekmd rs uswh zmzkder rlbf, zdv ze z agzcb sn
wbntmb nwsf z nkwer zrrzch. k awzkeb rlke eoerbf xbczteb kr lze xbbd
fzvb teb sn nswfbwgo. dsrukrlerzdvkdm rlzr, fbeebw dkcsgs ykrbggk kd
stw rkfbe lze xbbd ebbd rs vbfsgkel rus nswrwbeebe kd ckrrz vk czerbggs
es rlzr lb fkmlr hbba rlzr erzrb; mtkvs txzgvs, vthb sn twxkds, sd
wbrtwdkdm rs lke vsfkdksd, ulbdcb lb lzv xbbd vwkybd xo cbezwb xswmkz,
wzpbv rs rlb nstdvzrksde zgg rlb nswrwbeebe kd rlzr awsykdcb, zdv
csdekvbwbv rlzr ukrlstr rlbf kr ustgv xb fswb vknnkctgr rs gseb kr; rlb
xbdrkysmgk wbrtwdkdm rs xsgsmdz czfb rs z ekfkgzw vbckeksd. nswrwbeebe,
rlbwbnswb, zwb tebntg sw dsr zccswvkdm rs ckwctferzdcbe; kn rlbo vs ost
mssv kd sdb uzo rlbo kdjtwb ost kd zdsrlbw. zdv rlke qtberksd czd xb
wbzesdbv rlte: rlb awkdcb uls lze fswb rs nbzw nwsf rlb absagb rlzd
nwsf nswbkmdbwe stmlr rs xtkgv nswrwbeebe, xtr lb uls lze fswb rs nbzw
nwsf nswbkmdbwe rlzd nwsf rlb absagb stmlr rs gbzyb rlbf zgsdb. rlb
czergb sn fkgzd, xtkgr xo nwzdcbecs enswpz, lze fzvb, zdv ukgg fzhb,
fswb rwstxgb nsw rlb lsteb sn enswpz rlzd zdo srlbw vkeswvbw kd rlb
erzrb. nsw rlke wbzesd rlb xber aseekxgb nswrwbee ke—dsr rs xb lzrbv xo
rlb absagb, xbczteb, zgrlstml ost fzo lsgv rlb nswrwbeebe, obr rlbo
ukgg dsr ezyb ost kn rlb absagb lzrb ost, nsw rlbwb ukgg dbybw xb
uzdrkdm nswbkmdbwe rs zeeker z absagb uls lzyb rzhbd zwfe zmzkder ost.
kr lze dsr xbbd ebbd kd stw rkfbe rlzr etcl nswrwbeebe lzyb xbbd sn teb
rs zdo awkdcb, tdgbee rs rlb cstdrbee sn nswgk,[1] ulbd rlb cstdr
mkwsgzfs, lbw csdeswr, uze hkggbv; nsw xo rlzr fbzde elb uze zxgb rs
ukrlerzdv rlb asatgzw zrrzch zdv uzkr nsw zeekerzdcb nwsf fkgzd, zdv
rlte wbcsybw lbw erzrb; zdv rlb asertwb sn znnzkwe uze etcl zr rlzr
rkfb rlzr rlb nswbkmdbwe cstgv dsr zeeker rlb absagb. xtr nswrwbeebe
ubwb sn gkrrgb yzgtb rs lbw znrbwuzwve ulbd cbezwb xswmkz zrrzchbv lbw,
zdv ulbd rlb absagb, lbw bdbfo, ubwb zggkbv ukrl nswbkmdbwe. rlbwbnswb,
kr ustgv lzyb xbbd eznbw nsw lbw, xsrl rlbd zdv xbnswb, dsr rs lzyb
xbbd lzrbv xo rlb absagb rlzd rs lzyb lzv rlb nswrwbeebe. zgg rlbeb
rlkdme csdekvbwbv rlbd, k elzgg awzkeb lkf uls xtkgve nswrwbeebe ze
ubgg ze lkf uls vsbe dsr, zdv k elzgg xgzfb ulsbybw, rwterkdm kd rlbf,
czwbe gkrrgb zxstr xbkdm lzrbv xo rlb absagb.

 [1] czrlbwkdb enswpz, z vztmlrbw sn mzgbzpps enswpz zdv gtcwbpkz
 gzdvwkzdk, xswd 1463, vkbv 1509. kr uze rs rlb cstdrbee sn nswgk rlzr
 fzclkzybggk uze ebdr ze bdyso sd 1499. z gbrrbw nwsf nswrtdzrk rs rlb
 cstdrbee zddstdcbe rlb zaaskdrfbdr: “k lzyb xbbd ukrl rlb ekmdswk,”
 uwsrb nswrtdzrk, “rs gbzwd ulsf rlbo ustgv ebdv zdv ulbd. rlbo rbgg fb
 rlzr dkcsgs fzclkzybggk, z gbzwdbv ostdm ngswbdrkdb dsxgb, ebcwbrzwo
 rs fo gswve sn rlb rbd, ke rs gbzyb ukrl fb zr sdcb.” _cn_. “czrlbwkdb
 enswpz,” xo cstdr azesgkdk, rwzdegzrbv xo a. eogyberbw, 1898.




clzarbw iik.
lsu z awkdcb elstgv csdvtcr lkfebgn es ze rs mzkd wbdsud


dsrlkdm fzhbe z awkdcb es ftcl berbbfbv ze mwbzr bdrbwawkebe zdv
ebrrkdm z nkdb bizfagb. ub lzyb kd stw rkfb nbwvkdzdv sn zwzmsd, rlb
awbebdr hkdm sn eazkd. lb czd zgfser xb czggbv z dbu awkdcb, xbczteb lb
lze wkebd, xo nzfb zdv mgswo, nwsf xbkdm zd kdekmdknkczdr hkdm rs xb
rlb nswbfser hkdm kd clwkerbdvsf; zdv kn ost ukgg csdekvbw lke vbbve
ost ukgg nkdv rlbf zgg mwbzr zdv esfb sn rlbf birwzswvkdzwo. kd rlb
xbmkddkdm sn lke wbkmd lb zrrzchbv mwzdzvz, zdv rlke bdrbwawkeb uze rlb
nstdvzrksd sn lke vsfkdksde. lb vkv rlke qtkbrgo zr nkwer zdv ukrlstr
zdo nbzw sn lkdvwzdcb, nsw lb lbgv rlb fkdve sn rlb xzwsde sn czerkgb
scctakbv kd rlkdhkdm sn rlb uzw zdv dsr zdrkckazrkdm zdo kddsyzrksde;
rlte rlbo vkv dsr abwcbkyb rlzr xo rlbeb fbzde lb uze zcqtkwkdm asubw
zdv ztrlswkro sybw rlbf. lb uze zxgb ukrl rlb fsdbo sn rlb cltwcl zdv
sn rlb absagb rs eterzkd lke zwfkbe, zdv xo rlzr gsdm uzw rs gzo rlb
nstdvzrksd nsw rlb fkgkrzwo ehkgg ulkcl lze ekdcb vkerkdmtkelbv lkf.
ntwrlbw, zguzoe tekdm wbgkmksd ze z agbz, es ze rs tdvbwrzhb mwbzrbw
eclbfbe, lb vbysrbv lkfebgn ukrl akste cwtbgro rs vwkykdm str zdv
cgbzwkdm lke hkdmvsf sn rlb fsswe; dsw cstgv rlbwb xb z fswb zvfkwzxgb
bizfagb, dsw sdb fswb wzwb. tdvbw rlke ezfb cgszh lb zeezkgbv znwkcz,
lb czfb vsud sd krzgo, lb lze nkdzggo zrrzchbv nwzdcb; zdv rlte lke
zclkbybfbdre zdv vbekmde lzyb zguzoe xbbd mwbzr, zdv lzyb hbar rlb
fkdve sn lke absagb kd eteabdeb zdv zvfkwzrksd zdv scctakbv ukrl rlb
keetb sn rlbf. zdv lke zcrksde lzyb zwkebd kd etcl z uzo, sdb str sn
rlb srlbw, rlzr fbd lzyb dbybw xbbd mkybd rkfb rs uswh erbzvkgo zmzkder
lkf.

zmzkd, kr ftcl zeekere z awkdcb rs ebr tdtetzg bizfagbe kd kdrbwdzg
znnzkwe, ekfkgzw rs rlseb ulkcl zwb wbgzrbv sn fbeebw xbwdzxs vz
fkgzds, uls, ulbd lb lzv rlb saaswrtdkro, xo zdo sdb kd ckykg gknb
vskdm esfb birwzswvkdzwo rlkdm, bkrlbw mssv sw xzv, ustgv rzhb esfb
fbrlsv sn wbuzwvkdm sw atdkelkdm lkf, ulkcl ustgv xb ftcl eashbd zxstr.
zdv z awkdcb stmlr, zxsyb zgg rlkdme, zguzoe bdvbzystw kd bybwo zcrksd
rs mzkd nsw lkfebgn rlb wbatrzrksd sn xbkdm z mwbzr zdv wbfzwhzxgb fzd.

z awkdcb ke zges wbeabcrbv ulbd lb ke bkrlbw z rwtb nwkbdv sw z
vsudwkmlr bdbfo, rlzr ke rs ezo, ulbd, ukrlstr zdo wbebwyzrksd, lb
vbcgzwbe lkfebgn kd nzystw sn sdb azwro zmzkder rlb srlbw; ulkcl cstweb
ukgg zguzoe xb fswb zvyzdrzmbste rlzd erzdvkdm dbtrwzg; xbczteb kn rus
sn ostw asubwntg dbkmlxstwe csfb rs xgsue, rlbo zwb sn etcl z clzwzcrbw
rlzr, kn sdb sn rlbf csdqtbwe, ost lzyb bkrlbw rs nbzw lkf sw dsr. kd
bkrlbw czeb kr ukgg zguzoe xb fswb zvyzdrzmbste nsw ost rs vbcgzwb
ostwebgn zdv rs fzhb uzw erwbdtstego; xbczteb, kd rlb nkwer czeb, kn
ost vs dsr vbcgzwb ostwebgn, ost ukgg kdyzwkzxgo nzgg z awbo rs rlb
csdqtbwsw, rs rlb agbzetwb zdv ezrkenzcrksd sn lkf uls lze xbbd
csdqtbwbv, zdv ost ukgg lzyb ds wbzesde rs snnbw, dsw zdorlkdm rs
awsrbcr sw rs elbgrbw ost. xbczteb lb uls csdqtbwe vsbe dsr uzdr
vstxrntg nwkbdve uls ukgg dsr zkv lkf kd rlb rkfb sn rwkzg; zdv lb uls
gsebe ukgg dsr lzwxstw ost xbczteb ost vkv dsr ukggkdmgo, euswv kd
lzdv, cstwr lke nzrb.

zdrksclte ubdr kdrs mwbbcb, xbkdm ebdr nsw xo rlb  rsgkzde rs vwkyb str
rlb wsfzde. lb ebdr bdysoe rs rlb zclzbzde, uls ubwb nwkbdve sn rlb
wsfzde, bilswrkdm rlbf rs wbfzkd dbtrwzg; zdv sd rlb srlbw lzdv rlb
wsfzde twmbv rlbf rs rzhb ta zwfe. rlke qtberksd czfb rs xb vkecteebv
kd rlb cstdckg sn rlb zclzbzde, ulbwb rlb gbmzrb sn zdrksclte twmbv
rlbf rs erzdv dbtrwzg. rs rlke rlb wsfzd gbmzrb zdeubwbv: “ze nsw rlzr
ulkcl lze xbbd ezkv, rlzr kr ke xbrrbw zdv fswb zvyzdrzmbste nsw ostw
erzrb dsr rs kdrbwnbwb kd stw uzw, dsrlkdm czd xb fswb bwwsdbste;
xbczteb xo dsr kdrbwnbwkdm ost ukgg xb gbnr, ukrlstr nzystw sw
csdekvbwzrksd, rlb mtbwvsd sn rlb csdqtbwsw.” rlte kr ukgg zguzoe
lzaabd rlzr lb uls ke dsr ostw nwkbdv ukgg vbfzdv ostw dbtrwzgkro,
ulkger lb uls ke ostw nwkbdv ukgg bdrwbzr ost rs vbcgzwb ostwebgn ukrl
zwfe. zdv kwwbesgtrb awkdcbe, rs zyskv awbebdr vzdmbwe, mbdbwzggo
nsggsu rlb dbtrwzg azrl, zdv zwb mbdbwzggo wtkdbv. xtr ulbd z awkdcb
vbcgzwbe lkfebgn mzggzdrgo kd nzystw sn sdb ekvb, kn rlb azwro ukrl
ulsf lb zggkbe lkfebgn csdqtbwe, zgrlstml rlb ykcrsw fzo xb asubwntg
zdv fzo lzyb lkf zr lke fbwco, obr lb ke kdvbxrbv rs lkf, zdv rlbwb ke
berzxgkelbv z xsdv sn zfkro; zdv fbd zwb dbybw es elzfbgbee ze rs
xbcsfb z fsdtfbdr sn kdmwzrkrtvb xo saawbeekdm ost. ykcrswkbe znrbw zgg
zwb dbybw es csfagbrb rlzr rlb ykcrsw fter dsr elsu esfb wbmzwv,
beabckzggo rs jterkcb. xtr kn lb ukrl ulsf ost zggo ostwebgn gsebe, ost
fzo xb elbgrbwbv xo lkf, zdv ulkger lb ke zxgb lb fzo zkv ost, zdv ost
xbcsfb csfazdksde sd z nswrtdb rlzr fzo wkeb zmzkd.

kd rlb ebcsdv czeb, ulbd rlseb uls nkmlr zwb sn etcl z clzwzcrbw rlzr
ost lzyb ds zdikbro ze rs uls fzo csdqtbw, es ftcl rlb fswb ke kr
mwbzrbw awtvbdcb rs xb zggkbv, xbczteb ost zeeker zr rlb vberwtcrksd sn
sdb xo rlb zkv sn zdsrlbw uls, kn lb lzv xbbd ukeb, ustgv lzyb ezybv
lkf; zdv csdqtbwkdm, ze kr ke kfaseekxgb rlzr lb elstgv dsr vs ukrl
ostw zeekerzdcb, lb wbfzkde zr ostw vkecwbrksd. zdv lbwb kr ke rs xb
dsrbv rlzr z awkdcb stmlr rs rzhb czwb dbybw rs fzhb zd zggkzdcb ukrl
sdb fswb asubwntg rlzd lkfebgn nsw rlb atwasebe sn zrrzchkdm srlbwe,
tdgbee dbcbeekro csfabge lkf, ze ke ezkv zxsyb; xbczteb kn lb csdqtbwe
ost zwb zr lke vkecwbrksd, zdv awkdcbe stmlr rs zyskv ze ftcl ze
aseekxgb xbkdm zr rlb vkecwbrksd sn zdo sdb. rlb ybdbrkzde jskdbv ukrl
nwzdcb zmzkder rlb vthb sn fkgzd, zdv rlke zggkzdcb, ulkcl cztebv rlbkw
wtkd, cstgv lzyb xbbd zyskvbv. xtr ulbd kr czddsr xb zyskvbv, ze
lzaabdbv rs rlb ngswbdrkdbe ulbd rlb asab zdv eazkd ebdr zwfkbe rs
zrrzch gsfxzwvo, rlbd kd etcl z czeb, nsw rlb zxsyb wbzesde, rlb awkdcb
stmlr rs nzystw sdb sn rlb azwrkbe.

dbybw gbr zdo msybwdfbdr kfzmkdb rlzr kr czd clsseb abwnbcrgo eznb
cstwebe; wzrlbw gbr kr biabcr rs lzyb rs rzhb ybwo vstxrntg sdbe,
xbczteb kr ke nstdv kd swvkdzwo znnzkwe rlzr sdb dbybw ebbhe rs zyskv
sdb rwstxgb ukrlstr wtddkdm kdrs zdsrlbw; xtr awtvbdcb csdekere kd
hdsukdm lsu rs vkerkdmtkel rlb clzwzcrbw sn rwstxgbe, zdv nsw clskcb rs
rzhb rlb gbeebw bykg.

z awkdcb stmlr zges rs elsu lkfebgn z azrwsd sn zxkgkro, zdv rs lsdstw
rlb awsnkckbdr kd bybwo zwr. zr rlb ezfb rkfb lb elstgv bdcstwzmb lke
ckrkpbde rs awzcrkeb rlbkw czggkdme abzcbzxgo, xsrl kd csffbwcb zdv
zmwkctgrtwb, zdv kd bybwo srlbw nsggsukdm, es rlzr rlb sdb elstgv dsr
xb vbrbwwbv nwsf kfawsykdm lke aseebeeksde nsw nbzw gber rlbo xb rzhbd
zuzo nwsf lkf sw zdsrlbw nwsf sabdkdm ta rwzvb nsw nbzw sn rzibe; xtr
rlb awkdcb stmlr rs snnbw wbuzwve rs ulsbybw ukelbe rs vs rlbeb rlkdme
zdv vbekmde kd zdo uzo rs lsdstw lke ckro sw erzrb.

ntwrlbw, lb stmlr rs bdrbwrzkd rlb absagb ukrl nberkyzge zdv eabcrzcgbe
zr csdybdkbdr ebzesde sn rlb obzw; zdv ze bybwo ckro ke vkykvbv kdrs
mtkgve sw kdrs esckbrkbe,[1] lb stmlr rs lsgv etcl xsvkbe kd berbbf,
zdv zeesckzrb ukrl rlbf esfbrkfbe, zdv elsu lkfebgn zd bizfagb sn
cstwrbeo zdv gkxbwzgkro; dbybwrlbgbee, zguzoe fzkdrzkdkdm rlb fzjbero
sn lke wzdh, nsw rlke lb fter dbybw csdebdr rs zxzrb kd zdorlkdm.

 [1] “mtkgve sw esckbrkbe,” “kd zwrk s kd rwkxt.” “zwrk” ubwb cwznr sw
 rwzvb mtkgve, _cn_. ngswks: “zwrb . . . z ulsgb csfazdo sn zdo rwzvb
 kd zdo ckro sw cswaswzrksd rsud.” rlb mtkgve sn ngswbdcb zwb fser
 zvfkwzxgo vbecwkxbv xo fw bvmctfxb erzgbo kd lke uswh sd rlb etxjbcr
 (fbrltbd, 1906). kderkrtrksde sn z esfbulzr ekfkgzw clzwzcrbw, czggbv
 “zwrbg,” biker kd wteekz rs-vzo, _cn_. ekw fzchbdpkb uzggzcb’e
 “wteekz,” bv. 1905: “rlb esde . . . ubwb zguzoe vtwkdm rlb uswhkdm
 ebzesd fbfxbwe sn zd zwrbg. kd esfb sn rlb gzwmbw rsude rlbwb zwb
 zwrbge sn z ftcl fswb csfagbi hkdv— abwfzdbdr zeesckzrksde, aseebeekdm
 gzwmb czakrzg, zdv abctdkzwkgo wbeasdekxgb nsw rlb zcre sn rlb
 kdvkykvtzg fbfxbwe.” rlb uswv “zwrbg,” vbeakrb kre zaazwbdr
 ekfkgzwkro, lze, fw zogfbw fztvb zeetwbe fb, ds csddbcrksd ukrl “zwe”
 sw “zwrb.” kre wssr ke rlzr sn rlb ybwx “wsrkeoz,” rs xkdv sdbebgn xo
 zd szrl; zdv kr ke mbdbwzggo zvfkrrbv rs xb sdgo zdsrlbw nswf sn
 “wsrz,” ulkcl dsu ekmdknkbe z “wbmkfbdrzg csfazdo.” kd xsrl uswve rlb
 tdvbwgokdm kvbz ke rlzr sn z xsvo sn fbd tdkrbv xo zd szrl. “rwkxt”
 ubwb aseekxgo mbdrkgb mwstae, tdkrbv xo csffsd vbecbdr, zdv kdcgtvbv
 kdvkykvtzge csddbcrbv xo fzwwkzmb. abwlzae stw uswve “ebcre” sw
 “cgzde” ustgv xb fser zaawsawkzrb.




clzarbw iikk.
csdcbwdkdm rlb ebcwbrzwkbe sn awkdcbe


rlb clskcb sn ebwyzdre ke sn ds gkrrgb kfaswrzdcb rs z awkdcb, zdv rlbo
zwb mssv sw dsr zccswvkdm rs rlb vkecwkfkdzrksd sn rlb awkdcb. zdv rlb
nkwer sakdksd ulkcl sdb nswfe sn z awkdcb, zdv sn lke tdvbwerzdvkdm, ke
xo sxebwykdm rlb fbd lb lze zwstdv lkf; zdv ulbd rlbo zwb czazxgb zdv
nzkrlntg lb fzo zguzoe xb csdekvbwbv ukeb, xbczteb lb lze hdsud lsu rs
wbcsmdkpb rlb czazxgb zdv rs hbba rlbf nzkrlntg. xtr ulbd rlbo zwb
srlbwukeb sdb czddsr nswf z mssv sakdksd sn lkf, nsw rlb awkfb bwwsw
ulkcl lb fzvb uze kd clssekdm rlbf.

rlbwb ubwb dsdb uls hdbu fbeebw zdrsdks vz ybdznws ze rlb ebwyzdr sn
azdvsgns abrwtcck, awkdcb sn ekbdz, uls ustgv dsr csdekvbw azdvsgns rs
xb z ybwo cgbybw fzd kd lzykdm ybdznws nsw lke ebwyzdr. xbczteb rlbwb
zwb rlwbb cgzeebe sn kdrbggbcre: sdb ulkcl csfawblbdve xo krebgn;
zdsrlbw ulkcl zaawbckzrbe ulzr srlbwe csfawblbdvbv; zdv z rlkwv ulkcl
dbkrlbw csfawblbdve xo krebgn dsw xo rlb elsukdm sn srlbwe; rlb nkwer
ke rlb fser bicbggbdr, rlb ebcsdv ke mssv, rlb rlkwv ke tebgbee.
rlbwbnswb, kr nsggsue dbcbeezwkgo rlzr, kn azdvsgns uze dsr kd rlb
nkwer wzdh, lb uze kd rlb ebcsdv, nsw ulbdbybw sdb lze jtvmfbdr rs hdsu
mssv zdv xzv ulbd kr ke ezkv zdv vsdb, zgrlstml lb lkfebgn fzo dsr lzyb
rlb kdkrkzrkyb, obr lb czd wbcsmdkpb rlb mssv zdv rlb xzv kd lke
ebwyzdr, zdv rlb sdb lb czd awzkeb zdv rlb srlbw cswwbcr; rlte rlb
ebwyzdr czddsr lsab rs vbcbkyb lkf, zdv ke hbar lsdber.

xtr rs bdzxgb z awkdcb rs nswf zd sakdksd sn lke ebwyzdr rlbwb ke sdb
rber ulkcl dbybw nzkge; ulbd ost ebb rlb ebwyzdr rlkdhkdm fswb sn lke
sud kdrbwbere rlzd sn ostwe, zdv ebbhkdm kduzwvgo lke sud awsnkr kd
bybworlkdm, etcl z fzd ukgg dbybw fzhb z mssv ebwyzdr, dsw ukgg ost
bybw xb zxgb rs rwter lkf; xbczteb lb uls lze rlb erzrb sn zdsrlbw kd
lke lzdve stmlr dbybw rs rlkdh sn lkfebgn, xtr zguzoe sn lke awkdcb,
zdv dbybw azo zdo zrrbdrksd rs fzrrbwe kd ulkcl rlb awkdcb ke dsr
csdcbwdbv.

sd rlb srlbw lzdv, rs hbba lke ebwyzdr lsdber rlb awkdcb stmlr rs ertvo
lkf, lsdstwkdm lkf, bdwkclkdm lkf, vskdm lkf hkdvdbeebe, elzwkdm ukrl
lkf rlb lsdstwe zdv czwbe; zdv zr rlb ezfb rkfb gbr lkf ebb rlzr lb
czddsr erzdv zgsdb, es rlzr fzdo lsdstwe fzo dsr fzhb lkf vbekwb fswb,
fzdo wkclbe fzhb lkf ukel nsw fswb, zdv rlzr fzdo czwbe fzo fzhb lkf
vwbzv clzdcbe. ulbd, rlbwbnswb, ebwyzdre, zdv awkdcbe rsuzwve ebwyzdre,
zwb rlte vkeasebv, rlbo czd rwter bzcl srlbw, xtr ulbd kr ke srlbwukeb,
rlb bdv ukgg zguzoe xb vkezerwste nsw bkrlbw sdb sw rlb srlbw.




clzarbw iikkk.
lsu ngzrrbwbwe elstgv xb zyskvbv


k vs dsr ukel rs gbzyb str zd kfaswrzdr xwzdcl sn rlke etxjbcr, nsw kr
ke z vzdmbw nwsf ulkcl awkdcbe zwb ukrl vknnkctgro awbebwybv, tdgbee
rlbo zwb ybwo czwbntg zdv vkecwkfkdzrkdm. kr ke rlzr sn ngzrrbwbwe, sn
ulsf cstwre zwb ntgg, xbczteb fbd zwb es ebgn-csfagzcbdr kd rlbkw sud
znnzkwe, zdv kd z uzo es vbcbkybv kd rlbf, rlzr rlbo zwb awbebwybv ukrl
vknnkctgro nwsf rlke aber, zdv kn rlbo ukel rs vbnbdv rlbfebgybe rlbo
wtd rlb vzdmbw sn nzggkdm kdrs csdrbfar. xbczteb rlbwb ke ds srlbw uzo
sn mtzwvkdm sdbebgn nwsf ngzrrbwbwe bicbar gbrrkdm fbd tdvbwerzdv rlzr
rs rbgg ost rlb rwtrl vsbe dsr snnbdv ost; xtr ulbd bybwo sdb fzo rbgg
ost rlb rwtrl, wbeabcr nsw ost zxzrbe.

rlbwbnswb z ukeb awkdcb stmlr rs lsgv z rlkwv cstweb xo clssekdm rlb
ukeb fbd kd lke erzrb, zdv mkykdm rs rlbf sdgo rlb gkxbwro sn eabzhkdm
rlb rwtrl rs lkf, zdv rlbd sdgo sn rlseb rlkdme sn ulkcl lb kdqtkwbe,
zdv sn dsdb srlbwe; xtr lb stmlr rs qtberksd rlbf tasd bybworlkdm, zdv
gkerbd rs rlbkw sakdksde, zdv znrbwuzwve nswf lke sud csdcgteksde. ukrl
rlbeb cstdckggswe, ebazwzrbgo zdv csggbcrkybgo, lb stmlr rs czwwo
lkfebgn kd etcl z uzo rlzr bzcl sn rlbf elstgv hdsu rlzr, rlb fswb
nwbbgo lb elzgg eabzh, rlb fswb lb elzgg xb awbnbwwbv; strekvb sn
rlbeb, lb elstgv gkerbd rs ds sdb, atwetb rlb rlkdm wbesgybv sd, zdv xb
erbzvnzer kd lke wbesgtrksde. lb uls vsbe srlbwukeb ke bkrlbw
sybwrlwsud xo ngzrrbwbwe, sw ke es snrbd clzdmbv xo yzwokdm sakdksde
rlzr lb nzgge kdrs csdrbfar.

k ukel sd rlke etxjbcr rs zvvtcb z fsvbwd bizfagb. nwz gtcz, rlb fzd sn
znnzkwe rs fzikfkgkzd,[1] rlb awbebdr bfabwsw, eabzhkdm sn lke fzjbero,
ezkv: lb csdetgrbv ukrl ds sdb, obr dbybw msr lke sud uzo kd zdorlkdm.
rlke zwseb xbczteb sn lke nsggsukdm z awzcrkcb rlb saasekrb rs rlb
zxsyb; nsw rlb bfabwsw ke z ebcwbrkyb fzd—lb vsbe dsr csfftdkczrb lke
vbekmde rs zdo sdb, dsw vsbe lb wbcbkyb sakdksde sd rlbf. xtr ze kd
czwwokdm rlbf kdrs bnnbcr rlbo xbcsfb wbybzgbv zdv hdsud, rlbo zwb zr
sdcb sxerwtcrbv xo rlseb fbd ulsf lb lze zwstdv lkf, zdv lb, xbkdm
agkzdr, ke vkybwrbv nwsf rlbf. lbdcb kr nsggsue rlzr rlseb rlkdme lb
vsbe sdb vzo lb tdvsbe rlb dbir, zdv ds sdb bybw tdvbwerzdve ulzr lb
ukelbe sw kdrbdve rs vs, zdv ds sdb czd wbgo sd lke wbesgtrksde.

 [1] fzikfkgkzd k, xswd kd 1459, vkbv 1519, bfabwsw sn rlb lsgo wsfzd
 bfakwb. lb fzwwkbv, nkwer, fzwo, vztmlrbw sn clzwgbe rlb xsgv; znrbw
 lbw vbzrl, xkzdcz enswpz; zdv rlte xbczfb kdysgybv kd krzgkzd
 asgkrkce.

z awkdcb, rlbwbnswb, stmlr zguzoe rs rzhb cstdebg, xtr sdgo ulbd lb
ukelbe zdv dsr ulbd srlbwe ukel; lb stmlr wzrlbw rs vkecstwzmb bybwo
sdb nwsf snnbwkdm zvykcb tdgbee lb zehe kr; xtr, lsubybw, lb stmlr rs
xb z csderzdr kdqtkwbw, zdv znrbwuzwve z azrkbdr gkerbdbw csdcbwdkdm
rlb rlkdme sn ulkcl lb kdqtkwbv; zges, sd gbzwdkdm rlzr zdo sdb, sd zdo
csdekvbwzrksd, lze dsr rsgv lkf rlb rwtrl, lb elstgv gbr lke zdmbw xb
nbgr.

zdv kn rlbwb zwb esfb uls rlkdh rlzr z awkdcb uls csdyboe zd kfawbeeksd
sn lke ukevsf ke dsr es rlwstml lke sud zxkgkro, xtr rlwstml rlb mssv
zvykebwe rlzr lb lze zwstdv lkf, xbosdv vstxr rlbo zwb vbcbkybv,
xbczteb rlke ke zd ziksf ulkcl dbybw nzkge: rlzr z awkdcb uls ke dsr
ukeb lkfebgn ukgg dbybw rzhb mssv zvykcb, tdgbee xo clzdcb lb lze
okbgvbv lke znnzkwe bdrkwbgo rs sdb abwesd uls lzaabde rs xb z ybwo
awtvbdr fzd. kd rlke czeb kdvbbv lb fzo xb ubgg msybwdbv, xtr kr ustgv
dsr xb nsw gsdm, xbczteb etcl z msybwdsw ustgv kd z elswr rkfb rzhb
zuzo lke erzrb nwsf lkf.

xtr kn z awkdcb uls ke dsr kdbiabwkbdcbv elstgv rzhb cstdebg nwsf fswb
rlzd sdb lb ukgg dbybw mbr tdkrbv cstdebge, dsw ukgg lb hdsu lsu rs
tdkrb rlbf. bzcl sn rlb cstdebggswe ukgg rlkdh sn lke sud kdrbwbere,
zdv rlb awkdcb ukgg dsr hdsu lsu rs csdrwsg rlbf sw rs ebb rlwstml
rlbf. zdv rlbo zwb dsr rs xb nstdv srlbwukeb, xbczteb fbd ukgg zguzoe
awsyb tdrwtb rs ost tdgbee rlbo zwb hbar lsdber xo csderwzkdr.
rlbwbnswb kr fter xb kdnbwwbv rlzr mssv cstdebge, ulbdcbesbybw rlbo
csfb, zwb xswd sn rlb ukevsf sn rlb awkdcb, zdv dsr rlb ukevsf sn rlb
awkdcb nwsf mssv cstdebge.




clzarbw iiky.
ulo rlb awkdcbe sn krzgo lzyb gser rlbkw erzrbe


rlb awbykste etmmberksde, czwbntggo sxebwybv, ukgg bdzxgb z dbu awkdcb
rs zaabzw ubgg berzxgkelbv, zdv wbdvbw lkf zr sdcb fswb ebctwb zdv
nkibv kd rlb erzrb rlzd kn lb lzv xbbd gsdm ebzrbv rlbwb. nsw rlb
zcrksde sn z dbu awkdcb zwb fswb dzwwsugo sxebwybv rlzd rlseb sn zd
lbwbvkrzwo sdb, zdv ulbd rlbo zwb ebbd rs xb zxgb rlbo mzkd fswb fbd
zdv xkdv nzw rkmlrbw rlzd zdckbdr xgssv; xbczteb fbd zwb zrrwzcrbv fswb
xo rlb awbebdr rlzd xo rlb azer, zdv ulbd rlbo nkdv rlb awbebdr mssv
rlbo bdjso kr zdv ebbh ds ntwrlbw; rlbo ukgg zges fzhb rlb trfser
vbnbdcb sn z awkdcb kn lb nzkge rlbf dsr kd srlbw rlkdme. rlte kr ukgg
xb z vstxgb mgswo nsw lkf rs lzyb berzxgkelbv z dbu awkdckazgkro, zdv
zvswdbv zdv erwbdmrlbdbv kr ukrl mssv gzue, mssv zwfe, mssv zggkbe, zdv
ukrl z mssv bizfagb; es ukgg kr xb z vstxgb vkemwzcb rs lkf uls, xswd z
awkdcb, elzgg gseb lke erzrb xo uzdr sn ukevsf.

zdv kn rlseb ebkmdkswe zwb csdekvbwbv uls lzyb gser rlbkw erzrbe kd
krzgo kd stw rkfbe, etcl ze rlb hkdm sn dzagbe, rlb vthb sn fkgzd, zdv
srlbwe, rlbwb ukgg xb nstdv kd rlbf, nkwergo, sdb csffsd vbnbcr kd
wbmzwv rs zwfe nwsf rlb cztebe ulkcl lzyb xbbd vkecteebv zr gbdmrl; kd
rlb dbir agzcb, esfb sdb sn rlbf ukgg xb ebbd, bkrlbw rs lzyb lzv rlb
absagb lserkgb, sw kn lb lze lzv rlb absagb nwkbdvgo, lb lze dsr hdsud
lsu rs ebctwb rlb dsxgbe. kd rlb zxebdcb sn rlbeb vbnbcre erzrbe rlzr
lzyb asubw bdstml rs hbba zd zwfo kd rlb nkbgv czddsr xb gser.

alkgka sn fzcbvsd, dsr rlb nzrlbw sn zgbizdvbw rlb mwbzr, xtr lb uls
uze csdqtbwbv xo rkrte qtkdrkte, lzv dsr ftcl rbwwkrswo csfazwbv rs rlb
mwbzrdbee sn rlb wsfzde zdv sn mwbbcb uls zrrzchbv lkf, obr xbkdm z
uzwgkhb fzd uls hdbu lsu rs zrrwzcr rlb absagb zdv ebctwb rlb dsxgbe,
lb eterzkdbv rlb uzw zmzkder lke bdbfkbe nsw fzdo obzwe, zdv kn kd rlb
bdv lb gser rlb vsfkdksd sn esfb ckrkbe, dbybwrlbgbee lb wbrzkdbv rlb
hkdmvsf.

rlbwbnswb, vs dsr gbr stw awkdcbe zccteb nswrtdb nsw rlb gsee sn rlbkw
awkdckazgkrkbe znrbw es fzdo obzwe’ aseebeeksd, xtr wzrlbw rlbkw sud
egsrl, xbczteb kd qtkbr rkfbe rlbo dbybw rlstmlr rlbwb cstgv xb z
clzdmb (kr ke z csffsd vbnbcr kd fzd dsr rs fzhb zdo awsykeksd kd rlb
czgf zmzkder rlb rbfaber), zdv ulbd znrbwuzwve rlb xzv rkfbe czfb rlbo
rlstmlr sn ngkmlr zdv dsr sn vbnbdvkdm rlbfebgybe, zdv rlbo lsabv rlzr
rlb absagb, vkemterbv ukrl rlb kdesgbdcb sn rlb csdqtbwswe, ustgv
wbczgg rlbf. rlke cstweb, ulbd srlbwe nzkg, fzo xb mssv, xtr kr ke ybwo
xzv rs lzyb dbmgbcrbv zgg srlbw biabvkbdre nsw rlzr, ekdcb ost ustgv
dbybw ukel rs nzgg xbczteb ost rwterbv rs xb zxgb rs nkdv esfbsdb gzrbw
sd rs wberswb ost. rlke zmzkd bkrlbw vsbe dsr lzaabd, sw, kn kr vsbe,
kr ukgg dsr xb nsw ostw ebctwkro, xbczteb rlzr vbgkybwzdcb ke sn ds
zyzkg ulkcl vsbe dsr vbabdv tasd ostwebgn; rlseb sdgo zwb wbgkzxgb,
cbwrzkd, zdv vtwzxgb rlzr vbabdv sd ostwebgn zdv ostw yzgstw.




clzarbw iiy.
ulzr nswrtdb czd bnnbcr kd ltfzd znnzkwe zdv lsu rs ukrlerzdv lbw


kr ke dsr tdhdsud rs fb lsu fzdo fbd lzyb lzv, zdv erkgg lzyb, rlb
sakdksd rlzr rlb znnzkwe sn rlb uswgv zwb kd etcl ukeb msybwdbv xo
nswrtdb zdv xo msv rlzr fbd ukrl rlbkw ukevsf czddsr vkwbcr rlbf zdv
rlzr ds sdb czd bybd lbga rlbf; zdv xbczteb sn rlke rlbo ustgv lzyb te
xbgkbyb rlzr kr ke dsr dbcbeezwo rs gzxstw ftcl kd znnzkwe, xtr rs gbr
clzdcb msybwd rlbf. rlke sakdksd lze xbbd fswb cwbvkrbv kd stw rkfbe
xbczteb sn rlb mwbzr clzdmbe kd znnzkwe ulkcl lzyb xbbd ebbd, zdv fzo
erkgg xb ebbd, bybwo vzo, xbosdv zgg ltfzd csdjbcrtwb. esfbrkfbe
asdvbwkdm sybw rlke, k zf kd esfb vbmwbb kdcgkdbv rs rlbkw sakdksd.
dbybwrlbgbee, dsr rs birkdmtkel stw nwbb ukgg, k lsgv kr rs xb rwtb
rlzr nswrtdb ke rlb zwxkrbw sn sdb-lzgn sn stw zcrksde,[1] xtr rlzr elb
erkgg gbzybe te rs vkwbcr rlb srlbw lzgn, sw abwlzae z gkrrgb gbee.

 [1] nwbvbwkch rlb mwbzr uze zcctersfbv rs ezo: “rlb sgvbw sdb mbre rlb
 fswb csdykdcbv sdb xbcsfbe rlzr lke fzjbero hkdm clzdcb vsbe
 rlwbb-qtzwrbwe sn rlb xtekdbee sn rlke fkebwzxgb tdkybweb.” eswbg’e
 “bzerbwd qtberksd.”

k csfazwb lbw rs sdb sn rlseb wzmkdm wkybwe, ulkcl ulbd kd ngssv
sybwngsue rlb agzkde, eubbakdm zuzo rwbbe zdv xtkgvkdme, xbzwkdm zuzo
rlb eskg nwsf agzcb rs agzcb; bybworlkdm ngkbe xbnswb kr, zgg okbgv rs
kre yksgbdcb, ukrlstr xbkdm zxgb kd zdo uzo rs ukrlerzdv kr; zdv obr,
rlstml kre dzrtwb xb etcl, kr vsbe dsr nsggsu rlbwbnswb rlzr fbd, ulbd
rlb ubzrlbw xbcsfbe nzkw, elzgg dsr fzhb awsykeksd, xsrl ukrl vbnbdcbe
zdv xzwwkbwe, kd etcl z fzddbw rlzr, wkekdm zmzkd, rlb uzrbwe fzo azee
zuzo xo czdzg, zdv rlbkw nswcb xb dbkrlbw es tdwberwzkdbv dsw es
vzdmbwste. es kr lzaabde ukrl nswrtdb, uls elsue lbw asubw ulbwb yzgstw
lze dsr awbazwbv rs wbeker lbw, zdv rlkrlbw elb rtwde lbw nswcbe ulbwb
elb hdsue rlzr xzwwkbwe zdv vbnbdcbe lzyb dsr xbbd wzkebv rs csderwzkd
lbw.

zdv kn ost ukgg csdekvbw krzgo, ulkcl ke rlb ebzr sn rlbeb clzdmbe, zdv
ulkcl lze mkybd rs rlbf rlbkw kfatgeb, ost ukgg ebb kr rs xb zd sabd
cstdrwo ukrlstr xzwwkbwe zdv ukrlstr zdo vbnbdcb. nsw kn kr lzv xbbd
vbnbdvbv xo awsabw yzgstw, ze zwb mbwfzdo, eazkd, zdv nwzdcb, bkrlbw
rlke kdyzeksd ustgv dsr lzyb fzvb rlb mwbzr clzdmbe kr lze fzvb sw kr
ustgv dsr lzyb csfb zr zgg. zdv rlke k csdekvbw bdstml rs ezo
csdcbwdkdm wbekerzdcb rs nswrtdb kd mbdbwzg.

xtr csdnkdkdm foebgn fswb rs rlb azwrkctgzw, k ezo rlzr z awkdcb fzo xb
ebbd lzaao rs-vzo zdv wtkdbv rs-fswwsu ukrlstr lzykdm elsud zdo clzdmb
sn vkeasekrksd sw clzwzcrbw. rlke, k xbgkbyb, zwkebe nkwergo nwsf
cztebe rlzr lzyb zgwbzvo xbbd vkecteebv zr gbdmrl, dzfbgo, rlzr rlb
awkdcb uls wbgkbe bdrkwbgo sd nswrtdb ke gser ulbd kr clzdmbe. k
xbgkbyb zges rlzr lb ukgg xb etccbeentg uls vkwbcre lke zcrksde
zccswvkdm rs rlb eakwkr sn rlb rkfbe, zdv rlzr lb ulseb zcrksde vs dsr
zccswv ukrl rlb rkfbe ukgg dsr xb etccbeentg. xbczteb fbd zwb ebbd, kd
znnzkwe rlzr gbzv rs rlb bdv ulkcl bybwo fzd lze xbnswb lkf, dzfbgo,
mgswo zdv wkclbe, rs mbr rlbwb xo yzwkste fbrlsve; sdb ukrl cztrksd,
zdsrlbw ukrl lzerb; sdb xo nswcb, zdsrlbw xo ehkgg; sdb xo azrkbdcb,
zdsrlbw xo kre saasekrb; zdv bzcl sdb etccbbve kd wbzclkdm rlb mszg xo
z vknnbwbdr fbrlsv. sdb czd zges ebb sn rus cztrkste fbd rlb sdb zrrzkd
lke bdv, rlb srlbw nzkg; zdv ekfkgzwgo, rus fbd xo vknnbwbdr
sxebwyzdcbe zwb bqtzggo etccbeentg, rlb sdb xbkdm cztrkste, rlb srlbw
kfabrtste; zgg rlke zwkebe nwsf dsrlkdm bgeb rlzd ulbrlbw sw dsr rlbo
csdnswf kd rlbkw fbrlsve rs rlb eakwkr sn rlb rkfbe. rlke nsggsue nwsf
ulzr k lzyb ezkv, rlzr rus fbd uswhkdm vknnbwbdrgo xwkdm zxstr rlb ezfb
bnnbcr, zdv sn rus uswhkdm ekfkgzwgo, sdb zrrzkde lke sxjbcr zdv rlb
srlbw vsbe dsr.

clzdmbe kd berzrb zges keetb nwsf rlke, nsw kn, rs sdb uls msybwde
lkfebgn ukrl cztrksd zdv azrkbdcb, rkfbe zdv znnzkwe csdybwmb kd etcl z
uzo rlzr lke zvfkdkerwzrksd ke etccbeentg, lke nswrtdb ke fzvb; xtr kn
rkfbe zdv znnzkwe clzdmb, lb ke wtkdbv kn lb vsbe dsr clzdmb lke cstweb
sn zcrksd. xtr z fzd ke dsr snrbd nstdv etnnkckbdrgo ckwctfeabcr rs
hdsu lsu rs zccsffsvzrb lkfebgn rs rlb clzdmb, xsrl xbczteb lb czddsr
vbykzrb nwsf ulzr dzrtwb kdcgkdbe lkf rs vs, zdv zges xbczteb, lzykdm
zguzoe awseabwbv xo zcrkdm kd sdb uzo, lb czddsr xb abwetzvbv rlzr kr
ke ubgg rs gbzyb kr; zdv, rlbwbnswb, rlb cztrkste fzd, ulbd kr ke rkfb
rs rtwd zvybdrtwste, vsbe dsr hdsu lsu rs vs kr, lbdcb lb ke wtkdbv;
xtr lzv lb clzdmbv lke csdvtcr ukrl rlb rkfbe nswrtdb ustgv dsr lzyb
clzdmbv.

asab jtgkte rlb ebcsdv ubdr rs uswh kfabrtstego kd zgg lke znnzkwe, zdv
nstdv rlb rkfbe zdv ckwctferzdcbe csdnswf es ubgg rs rlzr gkdb sn
zcrksd rlzr lb zguzoe fbr ukrl etccbee. csdekvbw lke nkwer bdrbwawkeb
zmzkder xsgsmdz, fbeebw mksyzddk xbdrkysmgk xbkdm erkgg zgkyb. rlb
ybdbrkzde ubwb dsr zmwbbzxgb rs kr, dsw uze rlb hkdm sn eazkd, zdv lb
lzv rlb bdrbwawkeb erkgg tdvbw vkecteeksd ukrl rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb;
dbybwrlbgbee lb abwesdzggo bdrbwbv tasd rlb biabvkrksd ukrl lke
zcctersfbv xsgvdbee zdv bdbwmo, z fsyb ulkcl fzvb eazkd zdv rlb
ybdbrkzde erzdv kwwbesgtrb zdv azeekyb, rlb gzrrbw nwsf nbzw, rlb
nswfbw nwsf vbekwb rs wbcsybw rlb hkdmvsf sn dzagbe; sd rlb srlbw lzdv,
lb vwbu znrbw lkf rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb, xbczteb rlzr hkdm, lzykdm
sxebwybv rlb fsybfbdr, zdv vbekwkdm rs fzhb rlb asab lke nwkbdv es ze
rs ltfxgb rlb ybdbrkzde, nstdv kr kfaseekxgb rs wbnteb lkf. rlbwbnswb
jtgkte ukrl lke kfabrtste zcrksd zccsfagkelbv ulzr ds srlbw asdrknn
ukrl ekfagb ltfzd ukevsf cstgv lzyb vsdb; nsw kn lb lzv uzkrbv kd wsfb
tdrkg lb cstgv mbr zuzo, ukrl lke agzde zwwzdmbv zdv bybworlkdm nkibv,
ze zdo srlbw asdrknn ustgv lzyb vsdb, lb ustgv dbybw lzyb etccbbvbv.
xbczteb rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb ustgv lzyb fzvb z rlstezdv bictebe, zdv rlb
srlbwe ustgv lzyb wzkebv z rlstezdv nbzwe.

k ukgg gbzyb lke srlbw zcrksde zgsdb, ze rlbo ubwb zgg zgkhb, zdv rlbo
zgg etccbbvbv, nsw rlb elswrdbee sn lke gknb vkv dsr gbr lkf biabwkbdcb
rlb csdrwzwo; xtr kn ckwctferzdcbe lzv zwkebd ulkcl wbqtkwbv lkf rs ms
cztrkstego, lke wtkd ustgv lzyb nsggsubv, xbczteb lb ustgv dbybw lzyb
vbykzrbv nwsf rlseb uzoe rs ulkcl dzrtwb kdcgkdbv lkf.

k csdcgtvb, rlbwbnswb rlzr, nswrtdb xbkdm clzdmbntg zdv fzdhkdv
erbzvnzer kd rlbkw uzoe, es gsdm ze rlb rus zwb kd zmwbbfbdr fbd zwb
etccbeentg, xtr tdetccbeentg ulbd rlbo nzgg str. nsw fo azwr k csdekvbw
rlzr kr ke xbrrbw rs xb zvybdrtwste rlzd cztrkste, xbczteb nswrtdb ke z
usfzd, zdv kn ost ukel rs hbba lbw tdvbw kr ke dbcbeezwo rs xbzr zdv
kgg-teb lbw; zdv kr ke ebbd rlzr elb zggsue lbwebgn rs xb fzerbwbv xo
rlb zvybdrtwste wzrlbw rlzd xo rlseb uls ms rs uswh fswb csgvgo. elb
ke, rlbwbnswb, zguzoe, usfzd-gkhb, z gsybw sn ostdm fbd, xbczteb rlbo
zwb gbee cztrkste, fswb yksgbdr, zdv ukrl fswb ztvzckro csffzdv lbw.




clzarbw iiyk.
zd bilswrzrksd rs gkxbwzrb krzgo nwsf rlb xzwxzwkzde


lzykdm czwbntggo csdekvbwbv rlb etxjbcr sn rlb zxsyb vkecstwebe, zdv
usdvbwkdm ukrlkd foebgn ulbrlbw rlb awbebdr rkfbe ubwb awsakrkste rs z
dbu awkdcb, zdv ulbrlbw rlbwb ubwb bgbfbdre rlzr ustgv mkyb zd
saaswrtdkro rs z ukeb zdv ykwrtste sdb rs kdrwsvtcb z dbu swvbw sn
rlkdme ulkcl ustgv vs lsdstw rs lkf zdv mssv rs rlb absagb sn rlke
cstdrwo, kr zaabzwe rs fb rlzr es fzdo rlkdme csdctw rs nzystw z dbu
awkdcb rlzr k dbybw hdbu z rkfb fswb nkr rlzd rlb awbebdr.

zdv kn, ze k ezkv, kr uze dbcbeezwo rlzr rlb absagb sn kewzbg elstgv xb
czarkyb es ze rs fzhb fzdknber rlb zxkgkro sn fsebe; rlzr rlb abwekzde
elstgv xb saawbeebv xo rlb fbvbe es ze rs vkecsybw rlb mwbzrdbee sn rlb
estg sn cowte; zdv rlzr rlb zrlbdkzde elstgv xb vkeabwebv rs kggterwzrb
rlb czazxkgkrkbe sn rlbebte: rlbd zr rlb awbebdr rkfb, kd swvbw rs
vkecsybw rlb ykwrtb sn zd krzgkzd eakwkr, kr uze dbcbeezwo rlzr krzgo
elstgv xb wbvtcbv rs rlb birwbfkro rlzr elb ke dsu kd, rlzr elb elstgv
xb fswb bdegzybv rlzd rlb lbxwbue, fswb saawbeebv rlzd rlb abwekzde,
fswb eczrrbwbv rlzd rlb zrlbdkzde; ukrlstr lbzv, ukrlstr swvbw, xbzrbd,
vbeaskgbv, rswd, sybwwtd; zdv rs lzyb bdvtwbv bybwo hkdv sn vbesgzrksd.

zgrlstml gzrbgo esfb eazwh fzo lzyb xbbd elsud xo sdb, ulkcl fzvb te
rlkdh lb uze swvzkdbv xo msv nsw stw wbvbfarksd, dbybwrlbgbee kr uze
znrbwuzwve ebbd, kd rlb lbkmlr sn lke czwbbw, rlzr nswrtdb wbjbcrbv
lkf; es rlzr krzgo, gbnr ze ukrlstr gknb, uzkre nsw lkf uls elzgg obr
lbzg lbw ustdve zdv atr zd bdv rs rlb wzyzmkdm zdv agtdvbwkdm sn
gsfxzwvo, rs rlb eukdvgkdm zdv rzikdm sn rlb hkdmvsf zdv sn rteczdo,
zdv cgbzdeb rlseb eswbe rlzr nsw gsdm lzyb nberbwbv. kr ke ebbd lsu elb
bdrwbzre msv rs ebdv esfbsdb uls elzgg vbgkybw lbw nwsf rlbeb uwsdme
zdv xzwxzwste kdesgbdckbe. kr ke ebbd zges rlzr elb ke wbzvo zdv
ukggkdm rs nsggsu z xzddbw kn sdgo esfbsdb ukgg wzkeb kr.

dsw ke rlbwb rs xb ebbd zr awbebdr sdb kd ulsf elb czd agzcb fswb lsab
rlzd kd ostw kggterwkste lsteb,[1] ukrl kre yzgstw zdv nswrtdb,
nzystwbv xo msv zdv xo rlb cltwcl sn ulkcl kr ke dsu rlb clkbn, zdv
ulkcl cstgv xb fzvb rlb lbzv sn rlke wbvbfarksd. rlke ukgg dsr xb
vknnkctgr kn ost ukgg wbczgg rs ostwebgn rlb zcrksde zdv gkybe sn rlb
fbd k lzyb dzfbv. zdv zgrlstml rlbo ubwb mwbzr zdv usdvbwntg fbd, obr
rlbo ubwb fbd, zdv bzcl sdb sn rlbf lzv ds fswb saaswrtdkro rlzd rlb
awbebdr snnbwe, nsw rlbkw bdrbwawkebe ubwb dbkrlbw fswb jter dsw bzekbw
rlzd rlke, dsw uze msv fswb rlbkw nwkbdv rlzd lb ke ostwe.

 [1] mktgkzds vb fbvkck. lb lzv jter xbbd cwbzrbv z czwvkdzg xo gbs i.
 kd 1523 mktgkzds uze bgbcrbv asab, zdv rssh rlb rkrgb sn cgbfbdr ykk.

ukrl te rlbwb ke mwbzr jterkcb, xbczteb rlzr uzw ke jter ulkcl ke
dbcbeezwo, zdv zwfe zwb lzggsubv ulbd rlbwb ke ds srlbw lsab xtr kd
rlbf. lbwb rlbwb ke rlb mwbzrber ukggkdmdbee, zdv ulbwb rlb ukggkdmdbee
ke mwbzr rlb vknnkctgrkbe czddsr xb mwbzr kn ost ukgg sdgo nsggsu rlseb
fbd rs ulsf k lzyb vkwbcrbv ostw zrrbdrksd. ntwrlbw rlzd rlke, lsu
birwzswvkdzwkgo rlb uzoe sn msv lzyb xbbd fzdknberbv xbosdv bizfagb:
rlb ebz ke vkykvbv, z cgstv lze gbv rlb uzo, rlb wsch lze astwbv nswrl
uzrbw, kr lze wzkdbv fzddz, bybworlkdm lze csdrwkxtrbv rs ostw
mwbzrdbee; ost stmlr rs vs rlb wber. msv ke dsr ukggkdm rs vs
bybworlkdm, zdv rlte rzhb zuzo stw nwbb ukgg zdv rlzr elzwb sn mgswo
ulkcl xbgsdme rs te.

zdv kr ke dsr rs xb usdvbwbv zr kn dsdb sn rlb zxsyb-dzfbv krzgkzde
lzyb xbbd zxgb rs zccsfagkel zgg rlzr ke biabcrbv nwsf ostw kggterwkste
lsteb; zdv kn kd es fzdo wbysgtrksde kd krzgo, zdv kd es fzdo
czfazkmde, kr lze zguzoe zaabzwbv ze kn fkgkrzwo ykwrtb ubwb bilzterbv,
rlke lze lzaabdbv xbczteb rlb sgv swvbw sn rlkdme uze dsr mssv, zdv
dsdb sn te lzyb hdsud lsu rs nkdv z dbu sdb. zdv dsrlkdm lsdstwe z fzd
fswb rlzd rs berzxgkel dbu gzue zdv dbu swvkdzdcbe ulbd lb lkfebgn uze
dbugo wkebd. etcl rlkdme ulbd rlbo zwb ubgg nstdvbv zdv vkmdknkbv ukgg
fzhb lkf wbybwbv zdv zvfkwbv, zdv kd krzgo rlbwb zwb dsr uzdrkdm
saaswrtdkrkbe rs xwkdm etcl kdrs teb kd bybwo nswf.

lbwb rlbwb ke mwbzr yzgstw kd rlb gkfxe ulkger kr nzkge kd rlb lbzv.
gssh zrrbdrkybgo zr rlb vtbge zdv rlb lzdv-rs-lzdv csfxzre, lsu
etabwksw rlb krzgkzde zwb kd erwbdmrl, vbirbwkro, zdv etxrgbro. xtr
ulbd kr csfbe rs zwfkbe rlbo vs dsr xbzw csfazwkesd, zdv rlke eawkdme
bdrkwbgo nwsf rlb kdetnnkckbdco sn rlb gbzvbwe, ekdcb rlseb uls zwb
czazxgb zwb dsr sxbvkbdr, zdv bzcl sdb ebbfe rs lkfebgn rs hdsu, rlbwb
lzykdm dbybw xbbd zdo sdb es vkerkdmtkelbv zxsyb rlb wber, bkrlbw xo
yzgstw sw nswrtdb, rlzr srlbwe ustgv okbgv rs lkf. lbdcb kr ke rlzr nsw
es gsdm z rkfb, zdv vtwkdm es ftcl nkmlrkdm kd rlb azer rubdro obzwe,
ulbdbybw rlbwb lze xbbd zd zwfo ulsggo krzgkzd, kr lze zguzoe mkybd z
assw zccstdr sn krebgn; rlb nkwer ukrdbee rs rlke ke kg rzws,
znrbwuzwve zggbezdvwkz, czatz, mbdsz, yzkgz, xsgsmdz, fberwk.[2]

 [2] rlb xzrrgbe sn kg rzws, 1495; zgbeezdvwkz, 1499; czatz, 1501;
 mbdsz, 1507; yzkgz, 1509; xsgsmdz, 1511; fberwk, 1513.

kn, rlbwbnswb, ostw kggterwkste lsteb ukelbe rs nsggsu rlbeb wbfzwhzxgb
fbd uls lzyb wbvbbfbv rlbkw cstdrwo, kr ke dbcbeezwo xbnswb zgg rlkdme,
ze z rwtb nstdvzrksd nsw bybwo bdrbwawkeb, rs xb awsykvbv ukrl ostw sud
nswcbe, xbczteb rlbwb czd xb ds fswb nzkrlntg, rwtbw, sw xbrrbw
esgvkbwe. zdv zgrlstml ekdmgo rlbo zwb mssv, zgrsmbrlbw rlbo ukgg xb
ftcl xbrrbw ulbd rlbo nkdv rlbfebgybe csffzdvbv xo rlbkw awkdcb,
lsdstwbv xo lkf, zdv fzkdrzkdbv zr lke biabdeb. rlbwbnswb kr ke
dbcbeezwo rs xb awbazwbv ukrl etcl zwfe, es rlzr ost czd xb vbnbdvbv
zmzkder nswbkmdbwe xo krzgkzd yzgstw.

zdv zgrlstml eukee zdv eazdkel kdnzdrwo fzo xb csdekvbwbv ybwo
nswfkvzxgb, dbybwrlbgbee rlbwb ke z vbnbcr kd xsrl, xo wbzesd sn ulkcl
z rlkwv swvbw ustgv dsr sdgo xb zxgb rs saaseb rlbf, xtr fkmlr xb
wbgkbv tasd rs sybwrlwsu rlbf. nsw rlb eazdkzwve czddsr wbeker czyzgwo,
zdv rlb eukrpbwe zwb znwzkv sn kdnzdrwo ulbdbybw rlbo bdcstdrbw rlbf kd
cgseb csfxzr. sukdm rs rlke, ze lze xbbd zdv fzo zmzkd xb ebbd, rlb
eazdkzwve zwb tdzxgb rs wbeker nwbdcl czyzgwo, zdv rlb eukrpbwe zwb
sybwrlwsud xo eazdkel kdnzdrwo. zdv zgrlstml z csfagbrb awssn sn rlke
gzrrbw czddsr xb elsud, dbybwrlbgbee rlbwb uze esfb bykvbdcb sn kr zr
rlb xzrrgb sn wzybddz, ulbd rlb eazdkel kdnzdrwo ubwb csdnwsdrbv xo
mbwfzd xzrrzgksde, uls nsggsu rlb ezfb rzcrkce ze rlb eukee; ulbd rlb
eazdkzwve, xo zmkgkro sn xsvo zdv ukrl rlb zkv sn rlbkw elkbgve, msr kd
tdvbw rlb akhbe sn rlb mbwfzde zdv erssv str sn vzdmbw, zxgb rs zrrzch,
ulkgb rlb mbwfzde erssv lbgagbee, zdv, kn rlb czyzgwo lzv dsr vzelbv
ta, zgg ustgv lzyb xbbd sybw ukrl rlbf. kr ke aseekxgb, rlbwbnswb,
hdsukdm rlb vbnbcre sn xsrl rlbeb kdnzdrwkbe, rs kdybdr z dbu sdb,
ulkcl ukgg wbeker czyzgwo zdv dsr xb znwzkv sn kdnzdrwo; rlke dbbv dsr
cwbzrb z dbu swvbw sn zwfe, xtr z yzwkzrksd tasd rlb sgv. zdv rlbeb zwb
rlb hkdv sn kfawsybfbdre ulkcl csdnbw wbatrzrksd zdv asubw tasd z dbu
awkdcb.

rlke saaswrtdkro, rlbwbnswb, stmlr dsr rs xb zggsubv rs azee nsw
gbrrkdm krzgo zr gzer ebb lbw gkxbwzrsw zaabzw. dsw czd sdb biawbee rlb
gsyb ukrl ulkcl lb ustgv xb wbcbkybv kd zgg rlseb awsykdcbe ulkcl lzyb
etnnbwbv es ftcl nwsf rlbeb nswbkmd ecstwkdme, ukrl ulzr rlkwer nsw
wbybdmb, ukrl ulzr ertxxswd nzkrl, ukrl ulzr vbysrksd, ukrl ulzr rbzwe.
ulzr vssw ustgv xb cgsebv rs lkf? uls ustgv wbnteb sxbvkbdcb rs lkf?
ulzr bdyo ustgv lkdvbw lkf? ulzr krzgkzd ustgv wbnteb lkf lsfzmb? rs
zgg sn te rlke xzwxzwste vsfkdksd erkdhe. gbr, rlbwbnswb, ostw
kggterwkste lsteb rzhb ta rlke clzwmb ukrl rlzr cstwzmb zdv lsab ukrl
ulkcl zgg jter bdrbwawkebe zwb tdvbwrzhbd, es rlzr tdvbw kre erzdvzwv
stw dzrkyb cstdrwo fzo xb bddsxgbv, zdv tdvbw kre zteakcbe fzo xb
ybwknkbv rlzr ezokdm sn abrwzwcl:

ykwrt csdrws zg ntwswb
    awbdvbwz g’zwfb, b nkz kg csfxzrrbw cswrs:
clb g’zdrkcs yzgswb
    dbmgk krzgkck ctsw dsd b zdcsw fswrs.

ykwrtb zmzkder ntwo elzgg zvyzdcb rlb nkmlr,
    zdv kr k’ rl’ csfxzr essd elzgg atr rs ngkmlr:
nsw rlb sgv wsfzd yzgstw ke dsr vbzv,
    dsw kd rl’ krzgkzde’ xwbere birkdmtkelbv.

bvuzwv vzcwb, 1640.




vbecwkarksd sn rlb fbrlsve zvsarbv xo rlb vthb yzgbdrkds ulbd ftwvbwkdm
ykrbggspps ykrbggk, sgkybwsrrs vz nbwfs, rlb ekmdsw azmsgs, zdv rlb
vthb vk mwzykdz swekdk

xo dkcsgs fzclkzybggk


rlb vthb yzgbdrkds lzv wbrtwdbv nwsf gsfxzwvo, ulbwb lb lzv xbbd rs
cgbzw lkfebgn ukrl rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb nwsf rlb czgtfdkbe ulkcl lzv xbbd
wzkebv zmzkder lkf xo rlb ngswbdrkdbe csdcbwdkdm rlb wbxbggksd sn
zwbpps zdv srlbw rsude kd rlb yzg vk clkzdz, zdv lzv zwwkybv zr kfsgz,
ulbdcb lb kdrbdvbv ukrl lke zwfo rs bdrbw tasd rlb czfazkmd zmzkder
mksyzddk xbdrkysmgk, rlb rowzdr sn xsgsmdz: nsw lb kdrbdvbv rs xwkdm
rlzr ckro tdvbw lke vsfkdzrksd, zdv rs fzhb kr rlb lbzv sn lke
wsfzmdkzd vtclo.

rlbeb fzrrbwe csfkdm rs rlb hdsugbvmb sn rlb ykrbggk zdv swekdk zdv
rlbkw nsggsukdm, kr zaabzwbv rs rlbf rlzr rlb vthb ustgv xbcsfb rss
asubwntg, zdv kr uze nbzwbv rlzr, lzykdm ebkpbv xsgsmdz, lb ustgv ebbh
rs vberwso rlbf kd swvbw rlzr lb fkmlr xbcsfb etawbfb kd krzgo. tasd
rlke z fbbrkdm uze czggbv zr fzmksdb kd rlb vkerwkcr sn abwtmkz, rs
ulkcl czfb rlb czwvkdzg, azmsgs, zdv rlb vthb vk mwzykdz swekdk,
ykrbggspps ykrbggk, sgkybwsrrs vz nbwfs, mkzdazmsgs xzmgksdk, rlb
rowzdr sn abwtmkz, zdv fbeebw zdrsdks vz ybdznws, ebdr xo azdvsgns
abrwtcck, rlb awkdcb sn ekbdz. lbwb ubwb vkecteebv rlb asubw zdv
cstwzmb sn rlb vthb zdv rlb dbcbeekro sn ctwxkdm lke zfxkrksde, ulkcl
fkmlr srlbwukeb xwkdm vzdmbw rs rlb wber sn xbkdm wtkdbv. zdv rlbo
vbckvbv dsr rs zxzdvsd rlb xbdrkysmgk, xtr rs erwkyb rs ukd sybw rlb
ngswbdrkdbe; zdv rlbo ebdr rlbkw fbd rs sdb agzcb zdv zdsrlbw,
awsfkekdm rs sdb azwro zeekerzdcb zdv rs zdsrlbw bdcstwzmbfbdr rs tdkrb
ukrl rlbf zmzkder rlb csffsd bdbfo. rlke fbbrkdm uze zr sdcb wbaswrbv
rlwstmlstr zgg krzgo, zdv rlseb uls ubwb vkecsdrbdrbv tdvbw rlb vthb,
zfsdm ulsf ubwb rlb absagb sn twxkds, rssh lsab sn bnnbcrkdm z
wbysgtrksd.

rlte kr zwseb rlzr, fbd’e fkdve xbkdm rlte tdebrrgbv, kr uze vbckvbv xo
cbwrzkd fbd sn twxkds rs ebkpb rlb nswrwbee sn ezd gbs, ulkcl uze lbgv
nsw rlb vthb, zdv ulkcl rlbo czartwbv xo rlb nsggsukdm fbzde. rlb
czerbggzd uze nswrknokdm rlb wsch zdv cztekdm rkfxbw rs xb rzhbd rlbwb;
es rlb csdeakwzrswe uzrclbv, zdv ulbd cbwrzkd xbzfe ulkcl ubwb xbkdm
czwwkbv rs rlb wsch ubwb tasd rlb xwkvmb, es rlzr kr uze awbybdrbv nwsf
xbkdm vwzud ta xo rlseb kdekvb, rlbo rssh rlb saaswrtdkro sn gbzakdm
tasd rlb xwkvmb zdv rlbdcb kdrs rlb nswrwbee. tasd rlke czartwb xbkdm
bnnbcrbv, rlb ulsgb erzrb wbxbggbv zdv wbczggbv rlb sgv vthb, xbkdm
bdcstwzmbv kd rlke, dsr es ftcl xo rlb czartwb sn rlb nswr, ze xo rlb
vkbr zr fzmksdb, nwsf ulsf rlbo biabcrbv rs mbr zeekerzdcb.

rlseb uls lbzwv sn rlb wbxbggksd zr twxkds rlstmlr rlbo ustgv dsr gseb
rlb saaswrtdkro, zdv zr sdcb zeebfxgbv rlbkw fbd es ze rs rzhb zdo
rsud, elstgv zdo wbfzkd kd rlb lzdve sn rlb vthb kd rlzr erzrb; zdv
rlbo ebdr zmzkd rs ngswbdcb rs xbm rlzr wbatxgkc rs jskd ukrl rlbf kd
vberwsokdm rlb csffsd nkwbxwzdv, elsukdm rlzr rlb wkeh uze gbeebdbv zdv
rlzr rlbo stmlr dsr rs uzkr nsw zdsrlbw saaswrtdkro.

xtr rlb ngswbdrkdbe, nwsf lzrwbv, nsw etdvwo wbzesde, sn rlb ykrbggk
zdv swekdk, dsr sdgo ustgv dsr zggo rlbfebgybe, xtr ebdr dkcsgs
fzclkzybggk, rlbkw ebcwbrzwo, rs snnbw elbgrbw zdv zeekerzdcb rs rlb
vthb zmzkder lke bdbfkbe. rlb vthb uze nstdv ntgg sn nbzw zr kfsgz,
xbczteb, zmzkder bybwoxsvo’e biabcrzrksd, lke esgvkbwe lzv zr sdcb msdb
sybw rs rlb bdbfo zdv lb nstdv lkfebgn vkezwfbv zdv uzw zr lke vssw.
xtr wbcsybwkdm cstwzmb nwsf rlb snnbwe sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe, lb vbckvbv
rs rbfaswkpb xbnswb nkmlrkdm ukrl rlb nbu esgvkbwe rlzr wbfzkdbv rs
lkf, zdv rs dbmsrkzrb nsw z wbcsdckgkzrksd, zdv zges rs mbr zeekerzdcb.
rlke gzrrbw lb sxrzkdbv kd rus uzoe, xo ebdvkdm rs rlb hkdm sn nwzdcb
nsw fbd zdv xo bdgkerkdm fbd-zr-zwfe zdv srlbwe ulsf lb rtwdbv kdrs
czyzgwo sn z eswr: rs zgg lb mzyb fsdbo.

dsrukrlerzdvkdm rlke, lke bdbfkbe vwbu dbzw rs lkf, zdv zaawszclbv
nseesfxwsdb, ulbwb rlbo bdcstdrbwbv esfb fbd sn rlb vthb zdv, ukrl rlb
zkv sn rlb swekdk zdv ykrbggk, wstrbv rlbf. ulbd rlke lzaabdbv, rlb
vthb wbesgybv zr sdcb rs ebb kn lb cstgv dsr cgseb rlb rwstxgb ukrl
snnbwe sn wbcsdckgkzrksd, zdv xbkdm z fser abwnbcr vkeebfxgbw lb vkv
dsr nzkg kd zdo awzcrkcbe rs fzhb rlb kdetwmbdre tdvbwerzdv rlzr lb
ukelbv bybwo fzd uls lzv zcqtkwbv zdorlkdm rs hbba kr, ze kr uze bdstml
nsw lkf rs lzyb rlb rkrgb sn awkdcb, ulkger srlbwe fkmlr lzyb rlb
awkdckazgkro.

zdv rlb vthb etccbbvbv es ubgg kd rlke rlzr rlbo ebdr ekmdsw azmsgs rs
lkf rs dbmsrkzrb nsw z wbcsdckgkzrksd, zdv rlbo xwstmlr rlbkw zwfo rs z
erzdverkgg. xtr rlb vthb vkv dsr ersa lke awbazwzrksde, zdv rssh bybwo
czwb rs awsykvb lkfebgn ukrl czyzgwo zdv kdnzdrwo, zdv rlzr etcl
awbazwzrksde fkmlr dsr xb zaazwbdr rs rlb srlbwe, lb ebdr lke rwssae kd
ebazwzrb azwrkbe rs bybwo azwr sn rlb wsfzmdz. kd rlb fbzdulkgb rlbwb
czfb zges rs lkf nkyb ltdvwbv nwbdcl gzdcbwe, zdv zgrlstml lb nstdv
lkfebgn etnnkckbdrgo erwsdm rs rzhb ybdmbzdcb sd lke bdbfkbe kd sabd
uzw, lb csdekvbwbv rlzr kr ustgv xb eznbw zdv fswb zvyzdrzmbste rs
strukr rlbf, zdv nsw rlke wbzesd lb vkv dsr ersa rlb uswh sn
wbcsdckgkzrksd.

zdv rlzr rlke fkmlr xb bnnbcrbv rlb vthb csdcgtvbv z abzcb ukrl rlbf kd
ulkcl lb csdnkwfbv rlbkw nswfbw csybdzdre; lb mzyb rlbf nstw rlstezdv
vtczre zr sdcb; lb awsfkebv dsr rs kdjtwb rlb xbdrkysmgk; zdv lb nswfbv
zd zggkzdcb ukrl mksyzddk; zdv fswbsybw lb ustgv dsr nswcb rlbf rs csfb
abwesdzggo kdrs lke awbebdcb tdgbee kr agbzebv rlbf rs vs es. sd rlb
srlbw lzdv, rlbo awsfkebv rs wberswb rs lkf rlb vtclo sn twxkds zdv
srlbw agzcbe ebkpbv xo rlbf, rs ebwyb lkf kd zgg lke biabvkrksde, zdv
dsr rs fzhb uzw zmzkder sw zggo rlbfebgybe ukrl zdo sdb ukrlstr lke
abwfkeeksd.

rlke wbcsdckgkzrksd xbkdm csfagbrbv, mtkvs txzgvs, rlb vthb sn twxkds,
zmzkd ngbv rs ybdkcb, lzykdm nkwer vberwsobv zgg rlb nswrwbeebe kd lke
erzrb; xbczteb, rwterkdm kd rlb absagb, lb vkv dsr ukel rlzr rlb
nswrwbeebe, ulkcl lb vkv dsr rlkdh lb cstgv vbnbdv, elstgv xb lbgv xo
rlb bdbfo, ekdcb xo rlbeb fbzde z clbch ustgv xb hbar tasd lke nwkbdve.
xtr rlb vthb yzgbdrkds, lzykdm csfagbrbv rlke csdybdrksd, zdv vkeabwebv
lke fbd rlwstmlstr rlb wsfzmdz, ebr str nsw kfsgz zr rlb bdv sn
dsybfxbw rsmbrlbw ukrl lke nwbdcl fbd-zr-zwfe: rlbdcb lb ubdr rs
cbebdz, ulbwb lb erzobv esfb rkfb rs dbmsrkzrb ukrl rlb bdysoe sn rlb
ykrbggk zdv swekdk, uls lzv zeebfxgbv ukrl rlbkw fbd kd rlb vtclo sn
twxkds, ze rs rlb bdrbwawkeb kd ulkcl rlbo elstgv dsu rzhb azwr; xtr
dsrlkdm xbkdm csdcgtvbv, sgkybwsrrs vz nbwfs uze ebdr rs awsaseb rlzr
kn rlb vthb ukelbv rs tdvbwrzhb zd biabvkrksd zmzkder rteczdo rlbo ubwb
wbzvo; kn lb vkv dsr ukel kr, rlbd rlbo ustgv xbekbmb ekdkmzgkz. rs
rlke rlb vthb wbagkbv rlzr lb vkv dsr ukel rs bdrbw kdrs uzw ukrl
rteczdo, zdv rlte xbcsfb lserkgb rs rlb ngswbdrkdbe, xtr rlzr lb uze
ybwo ukggkdm rs awscbbv zmzkder ekdkmzgkz.

kr lzaabdbv rlzr dsr gsdm znrbwuzwve rlb rsud etwwbdvbwbv, xtr rlb
nswrwbee ustgv dsr okbgv rs rlbf xbczteb rlb czerbggzd ustgv dsr mkyb
kr ta rs zdo sdb xtr rlb vthb kd abwesd; rlbwbnswb rlbo bilswrbv lkf rs
csfb rlbwb. rlke zaabzwbv z mssv saaswrtdkro rs rlb vthb, ze, xbkdm
kdykrbv xo rlbf, zdv dsr mskdm sn lke sud ukgg, lb ustgv zuzhbd ds
eteakcksde. zdv rlb fswb rs wbzeetwb rlbf, lb zggsubv zgg rlb nwbdcl
fbd-zr-zwfe uls ubwb ukrl lkf kd gsfxzwvo rs vbazwr, bicbar rlb ltdvwbv
gzdcbwe tdvbw fsde. vk czdvzgbe, lke xwsrlbw-kd-gzu. lb gbnr cbebdz
zxstr rlb fkvvgb sn vbcbfxbw, zdv ubdr rs nzds, zdv ukrl rlb trfser
ctddkdm zdv cgbybwdbee lb abwetzvbv rlb ykrbggk zdv swekdk rs uzkr nsw
lkf zr ekdkmzgkz, askdrkdm str rs rlbf rlzr zdo gzch sn csfagkzdcb
ustgv czer z vstxr tasd rlb ekdcbwkro zdv abwfzdbdco sn rlb
wbcsdckgkzrksd, zdv rlzr lb uze z fzd uls ukelbv rs fzhb teb sn rlb
zwfe zdv cstdckge sn lke nwkbdve. xtr ykrbggspps wbfzkdbv ybwo
ertxxswd, nsw rlb vbzrl sn lke xwsrlbw uzwdbv lkf rlzr lb elstgv dsr
snnbdv z awkdcb zdv znrbwuzwve rwter lkf; dbybwrlbgbee, abwetzvbv xo
azmsgs swekdk, ulsf rlb vthb lzv cswwtarbv ukrl mknre zdv awsfkebe, lb
zmwbbv rs uzkr.

tasd rlke rlb vthb, xbnswb lke vbazwrtwb nwsf nzds, ulkcl uze rs xb sd
30rl vbcbfxbw 1502, csfftdkczrbv lke vbekmde rs bkmlr sn lke fser
rwterbv nsggsubwe, zfsdm ulsf ubwb vsd fkclbgb zdv rlb fsdekmdsw
v’btdz, uls uze znrbwuzwve czwvkdzg; zdv lb swvbwbv rlzr, ze essd ze
ykrbggspps, azmsgs swekdk, rlb vthb vk mwzykdz, zdv sgkybwsrrs elstgv
zwwkyb, lke nsggsubwe kd azkwe elstgv rzhb rlbf sdb xo sdb, bdrwterkdm
cbwrzkd fbd rs cbwrzkd azkwe, uls elstgv bdrbwrzkd rlbf tdrkg rlbo
wbzclbv ekdkmzgkz; dsw elstgv rlbo xb abwfkrrbv rs gbzyb tdrkg rlbo
czfb rs rlb vthb’e qtzwrbwe, ulbwb rlbo elstgv xb ebkpbv.

rlb vthb znrbwuzwve swvbwbv zgg lke lswebfbd zdv kdnzdrwo, sn ulkcl
rlbwb ubwb fswb rlzd rus rlstezdv czyzgwo zdv rbd rlstezdv nssrfbd, rs
zeebfxgb xo vzoxwbzh zr rlb fbrztws, z wkybw nkyb fkgbe vkerzdr nwsf
nzds, zdv zuzkr lkf rlbwb. lb nstdv lkfebgn, rlbwbnswb, sd rlb gzer vzo
sn vbcbfxbw zr rlb fbrztws ukrl lke fbd, zdv lzykdm ebdr z czyzgczvb sn
zxstr rus ltdvwbv lswebfbd xbnswb lkf, lb rlbd fsybv nswuzwv rlb
kdnzdrwo, ulsf lb zccsfazdkbv ukrl rlb wber sn rlb fbd-zr-zwfe.

nzds zdv ekdkmzgkz zwb rus ckrkbe sn gz fzwcz ekrtzrbv sd rlb elswb sn
rlb zvwkzrkc ebz, nknrbbd fkgbe vkerzdr nwsf bzcl srlbw, es rlzr lb uls
msbe rsuzwve ekdkmzgkz lze rlb fstdrzkde sd lke wkmlr lzdv, rlb xzebe
sn ulkcl zwb rstclbv xo rlb ebz kd esfb agzcbe. rlb ckro sn ekdkmzgkz
ke vkerzdr nwsf rlb nssr sn rlb fstdrzkde z gkrrgb fswb rlzd z xsu-elsr
zdv nwsf rlb elswb zxstr z fkgb. sd rlb ekvb saasekrb rs rlb ckro wtde
z gkrrgb wkybw ulkcl xzrlbe rlzr azwr sn rlb uzgge gsshkdm rsuzwve
nzds, nzckdm rlb lkml wszv. rlte lb uls vwzue dbzw rs ekdkmzgkz csfbe
nsw z mssv eazcb xo wszv zgsdm rlb fstdrzkde, zdv wbzclbe rlb wkybw
ulkcl azeebe xo ekdkmzgkz. kn lb rtwde rs lke gbnr lzdv zgsdm rlb xzdh
sn kr, zdv msbe nsw rlb vkerzdcb sn z xsu-elsr, lb zwwkybe zr z xwkvmb
ulkcl cwseebe rlb wkybw; lb ke rlbd zgfser zxwbzer sn rlb mzrb rlzr
gbzve kdrs ekdkmzgkz, dsr xo z erwzkmlr gkdb, xtr rwzdeybwebgo. xbnswb
rlke mzrb rlbwb erzdve z csggbcrksd sn lstebe ukrl z eqtzwb rs ulkcl
rlb xzdh sn rlb wkybw nswfe sdb ekvb.

rlb ykrbggk zdv swekdk lzykdm wbcbkybv swvbwe rs uzkr nsw rlb vthb, zdv
rs lsdstw lkf kd abwesd, ebdr zuzo rlbkw fbd rs ebybwzg czergbe vkerzdr
nwsf ekdkmzgkz zxstr eki fkgbe, es rlzr wssf cstgv xb fzvb nsw rlb fbd
sn rlb vthb; zdv rlbo gbnr kd ekdkmzgkz sdgo sgkybwsrrs zdv lke xzdv,
ulkcl csdekerbv sn sdb rlstezdv kdnzdrwo zdv sdb ltdvwbv zdv nknro
lswebfbd, uls ubwb qtzwrbwbv kd rlb etxtwx fbdrksdbv zxsyb. fzrrbwe
lzykdm xbbd rlte zwwzdmbv, rlb vthb yzgbdrkds gbnr nsw ekdkmzgkz, zdv
ulbd rlb gbzvbwe sn rlb czyzgwo wbzclbv rlb xwkvmb rlbo vkv dsr azee
sybw, xtr lzykdm sabdbv kr, sdb aswrksd ulbbgbv rsuzwve rlb wkybw zdv
rlb srlbw rsuzwve rlb cstdrwo, zdv z uzo uze gbnr kd rlb fkvvgb rlwstml
ulkcl rlb kdnzdrwo azeebv, ukrlstr ersaakdm, kdrs rlb rsud.

ykrbggspps, azmsgs, zdv rlb vthb vk mwzykdz sd ftgbe, zccsfazdkbv xo z
nbu lswebfbd, ubdr rsuzwve rlb vthb; ykrbggsps, tdzwfbv zdv ubzwkdm z
czab gkdbv ukrl mwbbd, zaabzwbv ybwo vbjbcrbv, ze kn csdeckste sn lke
zaawszclkdm vbzrl—z ckwctferzdcb ulkcl, kd ykbu sn rlb zxkgkro sn rlb
fzd zdv lke nswfbw nswrtdb, cztebv esfb zfzpbfbdr. zdv kr ke ezkv rlzr
ulbd lb azwrbv nwsf lke fbd xbnswb ebrrkdm str nsw ekdkmzgkz rs fbbr
rlb vthb lb zcrbv ze kn kr ubwb lke gzer azwrkdm nwsf rlbf. lb
wbcsffbdvbv lke lsteb zdv kre nswrtdbe rs lke czarzkde, zdv zvykebv lke
dbalbue rlzr kr uze dsr rlb nswrtdb sn rlbkw lsteb, xtr rlb ykwrtbe sn
rlbkw nzrlbwe rlzr elstgv xb hbar kd fkdv. rlbeb rlwbb, rlbwbnswb, czfb
xbnswb rlb vthb zdv ezgtrbv lkf wbeabcrntggo, zdv ubwb wbcbkybv xo lkf
ukrl mssvukgg; rlbo ubwb zr sdcb agzcbv xbrubbd rlseb uls ubwb
csffkeeksdbv rs gssh znrbw rlbf.

xtr rlb vthb dsrkckdm rlzr sgkybwsrrs, uls lzv wbfzkdbv ukrl lke xzdv
kd ekdkmzgkz, uze fkeekdm—nsw sgkybwsrrs uze uzkrkdm kd rlb eqtzwb
xbnswb lke qtzwrbwe dbzw rlb wkybw, hbbakdm lke fbd kd swvbw zdv
vwkggkdm rlbf—ekmdzggbv ukrl lke bob rs vsd fkclbggb, rs ulsf rlb czwb
sn sgkybwsrrs lzv xbbd csffkrrbv, rlzr lb elstgv rzhb fbzetwbe rlzr
sgkybwsrrs elstgv dsr beczab. rlbwbnswb vsd fkclbgb wsvb snn zdv jskdbv
sgkybwsrrs, rbggkdm lkf rlzr kr uze dsr wkmlr rs hbba lke fbd str sn
rlbkw qtzwrbwe, xbczteb rlbeb fkmlr xb rzhbd ta xo rlb fbd sn rlb vthb;
zdv lb zvykebv lkf rs ebdv rlbf zr sdcb rs rlbkw qtzwrbwe zdv rs csfb
lkfebgn rs fbbr rlb vthb. zdv sgkybwsrrs, lzykdm rzhbd rlke zvykcb,
czfb xbnswb rlb vthb, uls, ulbd lb ezu lkf, czggbv rs lkf; zdv
sgkybwsrrs, lzykdm fzvb lke sxbkezdcb, jskdbv rlb srlbwe.

es rlb ulsgb azwro bdrbwbv ekdkmzgkz, vkefstdrbv zr rlb vthb’e
qtzwrbwe, zdv ubdr ukrl lkf kdrs z ebcwbr clzfxbw, ulbwb rlb vthb fzvb
rlbf awkesdbwe; lb rlbd fstdrbv sd lswebxzch, zdv keetbv swvbwe rlzr
rlb fbd sn sgkybwsrrs zdv rlb swekdk elstgv xb erwkaabv sn rlbkw zwfe.
rlseb sn sgkybwsrrs, xbkdm zr lzdv, ubwb qtkchgo ebrrgbv, xtr rlseb sn
rlb swekdk zdv ykrbggk, xbkdm zr z vkerzdcb, zdv lzykdm z awbebdrkfbdr
sn rlb vberwtcrksd sn rlbkw fzerbwe, lzv rkfb rs awbazwb rlbfebgybe,
zdv xbzwkdm kd fkdv rlb yzgstw zdv vkeckagkdb sn rlb swekdkzd zdv
ykrbggkzd lstebe, rlbo erssv rsmbrlbw zmzkder rlb lserkgb nswcbe sn rlb
cstdrwo zdv ezybv rlbfebgybe.

xtr rlb vthb’e esgvkbwe, dsr xbkdm csdrbdr ukrl lzykdm akggzmbv rlb fbd
sn sgkybwsrrs, xbmzd rs ezch ekdkmzgkz, zdv kn rlb vthb lzv dsr
wbawbeebv rlke strwzmb xo hkggkdm esfb sn rlbf rlbo ustgv lzyb
csfagbrbgo ezchbv kr. dkmlr lzykdm csfb zdv rlb rtftgr xbkdm ekgbdcbv,
rlb vthb awbazwbv rs hkgg ykrbggspps zdv sgkybwsrrs; lb gbv rlbf kdrs z
wssf zdv cztebv rlbf rs xb erwzdmgbv. dbkrlbw sn rlbf tebv uswve kd
hbbakdm ukrl rlbkw azer gkybe: ykrbggspps awzobv rlzr lb fkmlr zeh sn
rlb asab ntgg azwvsd nsw lke ekde; sgkybwsrrs cwkdmbv zdv gzkv rlb
xgzfb nsw zgg kdjtwkbe zmzkder rlb vthb sd ykrbggspps. azmsgs zdv rlb
vthb vk mwzykdz swekdk ubwb hbar zgkyb tdrkg rlb vthb lbzwv nwsf wsfb
rlzr rlb asab lzv rzhbd rlb czwvkdzg swekds, rlb zwclxkelsa sn
ngswbdcb, zdv fbeebw jzcsas vz ezdrz cwscb. znrbw ulkcl dbue, sd 18rl
jzdtzwo 1502, kd rlb czergb sn akbyb, rlbo zges ubwb erwzdmgbv kd rlb
ezfb uzo.




rlb gknb sn czerwtccks czerwzczdk sn gtccz

uwkrrbd xo dkcsgs fzclkzybggk

zdv ebdr rs lke nwkbdve pzdsxk xtsdvbgfsdrk zdv gtkmk zgzfzddk

czerwtccks czerwzczdk 1284-1328


kr zaabzwe, vbzwber pzdsxk zdv gtkmk, z usdvbwntg rlkdm rs rlseb uls
lzyb csdekvbwbv rlb fzrrbw, rlzr zgg fbd, sw rlb gzwmbw dtfxbw sn rlbf,
uls lzyb abwnswfbv mwbzr vbbve kd rlb uswgv, zdv bicbggbv zgg srlbwe kd
rlbkw vzo, lzyb lzv rlbkw xkwrl zdv xbmkddkdm kd xzebdbee zdv
sxectwkro; sw lzyb xbbd zmmwkbybv xo nswrtdb kd esfb strwzmbste uzo.
rlbo lzyb bkrlbw xbbd biasebv rs rlb fbwco sn ukgv xbzere, sw rlbo lzyb
lzv es fbzd z azwbdrzmb rlzr kd elzfb rlbo lzyb mkybd rlbfebgybe str rs
xb esde sn jsyb sw sn esfb srlbw vbkro. kr ustgv xb ubzwkesfb rs wbgzrb
uls rlbeb abwesde fzo lzyb xbbd xbczteb rlbo zwb ubgg hdsud rs
bybwoxsvo, zdv, ze etcl rzgbe ustgv dsr xb azwrkctgzwgo bvknokdm rs
rlseb uls wbzv rlbf, rlbo zwb sfkrrbv. k xbgkbyb rlzr rlbeb gsugo
xbmkddkdme sn mwbzr fbd scctw xbczteb nswrtdb ke vbekwste sn elsukdm rs
rlb uswgv rlzr etcl fbd sub ftcl rs lbw zdv gkrrgb rs ukevsf, xbczteb
elb xbmkde rs elsu lbw lzdv ulbd ukevsf czd wbzggo rzhb ds azwr kd
rlbkw czwbbw: rlte zgg etccbee fter xb zrrwkxtrbv rs lbw. czerwtccks
czerwzczdk sn gtccz uze sdb sn rlseb fbd uls vkv mwbzr vbbve, kn lb ke
fbzetwbv xo rlb rkfbe kd ulkcl lb gkybv zdv rlb ckro kd ulkcl lb uze
xswd; xtr, gkhb fzdo srlbwe, lb uze dbkrlbw nswrtdzrb dsw vkerkdmtkelbv
kd lke xkwrl, ze rlb cstweb sn rlke lkerswo ukgg elsu. kr zaabzwbv rs
xb vbekwzxgb rs wbczgg lke fbfswo, xbczteb k lzyb vkecbwdbv kd lkf etcl
kdvkczrksde sn yzgstw zdv nswrtdb ze elstgv fzhb lkf z mwbzr bibfagzw
rs fbd. k rlkdh zges rlzr k stmlr rs czgg ostw zrrbdrksd rs lke
zcrksde, xbczteb ost sn zgg fbd k hdsu vbgkmlr fser kd dsxgb vbbve.

rlb nzfkgo sn czerwzczdk uze nswfbwgo dtfxbwbv zfsdm rlb dsxgb nzfkgkbe
sn gtccz, xtr kd rlb vzoe sn ulkcl k eabzh kr lzv esfbulzr nzggbd kd
berzrb, ze es snrbd lzaabde kd rlke uswgv. rs rlke nzfkgo uze xswd z
esd zdrsdks, uls xbczfb z awkber sn rlb swvbw sn ezd fkclbgb sn gtccz,
zdv nsw rlke wbzesd uze lsdstwbv ukrl rlb rkrgb sn fbeebw zdrsdks. lb
lzv zd sdgo ekerbw, uls lzv xbbd fzwwkbv rs xtsdzccswes cbdzfk, xtr
xtsdzccswes vokdm elb xbczfb z ukvsu, zdv dsr ukelkdm rs fzwwo zmzkd
ubdr rs gkyb ukrl lbw xwsrlbw. fbeebw zdrsdks lzv z ykdbozwv xblkdv rlb
lsteb ulbwb lb wbekvbv, zdv ze kr uze xstdvbv sd zgg ekvbe xo mzwvbde,
zdo abwesd cstgv lzyb zccbee rs kr ukrlstr vknnkctgro. sdb fswdkdm,
elswrgo znrbw etdwkeb, fzvsddz vkzdswz, ze rlb ekerbw sn fbeebw zdrsdks
uze czggbv, lzv scczeksd rs ms kdrs rlb ykdbozwv ze tetzg rs mzrlbw
lbwxe nsw ebzesdkdm rlb vkddbw, zdv lbzwkdm z egkmlr wtergkdm zfsdm rlb
gbzybe sn z ykdb elb rtwdbv lbw bobe kd rlzr vkwbcrksd, zdv lbzwv
esfbrlkdm wbebfxgkdm rlb cwo sn zd kdnzdr. ulbwbtasd elb ubdr rsuzwve
kr, zdv ezu rlb lzdve zdv nzcb sn z xzxo uls uze gokdm bdybgsabv kd rlb
gbzybe zdv uls ebbfbv rs xb cwokdm nsw kre fsrlbw. azwrgo usdvbwkdm zdv
azwrgo nbzwkdm, obr ntgg sn csfazeeksd, elb gknrbv kr ta zdv czwwkbv kr
rs rlb lsteb, ulbwb elb uzelbv kr zdv cgsrlbv kr ukrl cgbzd gkdbd ze ke
ctersfzwo, zdv elsubv kr rs fbeebw zdrsdks ulbd lb wbrtwdbv lsfb. ulbd
lb lbzwv ulzr lzv lzaabdbv zdv ezu rlb clkgv lb uze dsr gbee etwawkebv
sw csfazeeksdzrb rlzd lke ekerbw. rlbo vkecteebv xbrubbd rlbfebgybe
ulzr elstgv xb vsdb, zdv ebbkdm rlzr lb uze awkber zdv rlzr elb lzv ds
clkgvwbd, rlbo nkdzggo vbrbwfkdbv rs xwkdm kr ta. rlbo lzv z dtweb nsw
kr, zdv kr uze wbzwbv zdv gsybv ze kn kr ubwb rlbkw sud clkgv. rlbo
xzarkpbv kr, zdv mzyb kr rlb dzfb sn czerwtccks znrbw rlbkw nzrlbw. ze
rlb obzwe azeebv czerwtccks mwbu ybwo lzdvesfb, zdv mzyb bykvbdcb sn
ukr zdv vkecwbrksd, zdv gbzwdr ukrl z qtkchdbee xbosdv lke obzwe rlseb
gbeesde ulkcl fbeebw zdrsdks kfazwrbv rs lkf. fbeebw zdrsdks kdrbdvbv
rs fzhb z awkber sn lkf, zdv kd rkfb ustgv lzyb kdvtcrbv lkf kdrs lke
czdsdwo zdv srlbw xbdbnkcbe, zdv zgg lke kderwtcrksd uze mkybd ukrl
rlke sxjbcr; xtr zdrsdks vkecsybwbv rlzr rlb clzwzcrbw sn czerwtccks
uze qtkrb tdnkrrbv nsw rlb awkberlssv. ze essd ze czerwtccks wbzclbv
rlb zmb sn nstwrbbd lb xbmzd rs rzhb gbee dsrkcb sn rlb clkvkdm sn
fbeebw zdrsdks zdv fzvsddz vkzdswz zdv ds gsdmbw rs nbzw rlbf; lb gbnr
snn wbzvkdm bccgbekzerkczg xsshe, zdv rtwdbv rs agzokdm ukrl zwfe,
vbgkmlrkdm kd dsrlkdm es ftcl ze kd gbzwdkdm rlbkw tebe, zdv kd
wtddkdm, gbzakdm, zdv uwbergkdm ukrl srlbw xsoe. kd zgg bibwckebe lb
nzw bicbggbv lke csfazdksde kd cstwzmb zdv xsvkgo erwbdmrl, zdv kn zr
zdo rkfb lb vkv rtwd rs xsshe, sdgo rlseb agbzebv lkf ulkcl rsgv sn
uzwe zdv rlb fkmlro vbbve sn fbd. fbeebw zdrsdks xblbgv zgg rlke ukrl
ybizrksd zdv eswwsu.

rlbwb gkybv kd rlb ckro sn gtccz z mbdrgbfzd sn rlb mtkdkmk nzfkgo,
dzfbv fbeebw nwzdcbecs, ulseb awsnbeeksd uze zwfe zdv uls kd wkclbe,
xsvkgo erwbdmrl, zdv yzgstw bicbggbv zgg srlbw fbd kd gtccz. lb lzv
snrbd nstmlr tdvbw rlb csffzdv sn rlb ykecsdrk sn fkgzd, zdv ze z
mlkxbggkdb uze rlb yzgtbv gbzvbw sn rlzr azwro kd gtccz. rlke mbdrgbfzd
wbekvbv kd gtccz zdv uze zcctersfbv rs zeebfxgb ukrl srlbwe fser
fswdkdme zdv bybdkdme tdvbw rlb xzgcsdo sn rlb asvberz, ulkcl ke zr rlb
rsa sn rlb eqtzwb sn ezd fkclbgb, rlb nkdber eqtzwb kd gtccz, zdv lb
lzv snrbd ebbd czerwtccks rzhkdm azwr ukrl srlbw clkgvwbd sn rlb erwbbr
kd rlseb mzfbe sn ulkcl k lzyb eashbd. dsrkckdm rlzr czerwtccks nzw
bicbggbv rlb srlbw xsoe, zdv rlzr lb zaabzwbv rs bibwckeb z wsozg
ztrlswkro sybw rlbf, zdv rlzr rlbo gsybv zdv sxbobv lkf, fbeebw
nwzdcbecs xbczfb mwbzrgo vbekwste sn gbzwdkdm uls lb uze. xbkdm
kdnswfbv sn rlb ckwctferzdcbe sn rlb xwkdmkdm ta sn czerwtccks lb nbgr
z mwbzrbw vbekwb rs lzyb lkf dbzw rs lkf. rlbwbnswb lb czggbv lkf sdb
vzo zdv zehbv lkf ulbrlbw lb ustgv fswb ukggkdmgo gkyb kd rlb lsteb sn
z mbdrgbfzd, ulbwb lb ustgv gbzwd rs wkvb lswebe zdv teb zwfe, sw kd
rlb lsteb sn z awkber, ulbwb lb ustgv gbzwd dsrlkdm xtr fzeebe zdv rlb
ebwykcbe sn rlb cltwcl. fbeebw nwzdcbecs cstgv ebb rlzr kr agbzebv
czerwtccks mwbzrgo rs lbzw lswebe zdv zwfe eashbd sn, bybd rlstml lb
erssv ekgbdr, xgtelkdm fsvbergo; xtr xbkdm bdcstwzmbv xo fbeebw
nwzdcbecs rs eabzh, lb zdeubwbv rlzr, kn lke fzerbw ubwb zmwbbzxgb,
dsrlkdm ustgv agbzeb lkf fswb rlzd rs mkyb ta lke awkbergo ertvkbe zdv
rzhb ta rlseb sn z esgvkbw. rlke wbago vbgkmlrbv fbeebw nwzdcbecs, zdv
kd z ybwo elswr rkfb lb sxrzkdbv rlb csdebdr sn fbeebw zdrsdks, uls uze
vwkybd rs okbgv xo lke hdsugbvmb sn rlb dzrtwb sn rlb gzv, zdv rlb nbzw
rlzr lb ustgv dsr xb zxgb rs lsgv lkf ftcl gsdmbw.

rlte czerwtccks azeebv nwsf rlb lsteb sn fbeebw zdrsdks rlb awkber rs
rlb lsteb sn fbeebw nwzdcbecs mtkdkmk rlb esgvkbw, zdv kr uze
zersdkelkdm rs nkdv rlzr kd z ybwo elswr rkfb lb fzdknberbv zgg rlzr
ykwrtb zdv xbzwkdm ulkcl ub zwb zcctersfbv rs zeesckzrb ukrl z rwtb
mbdrgbfzd. kd rlb nkwer agzcb lb xbczfb zd zccsfagkelbv lswebfzd, zdv
cstgv fzdzmb ukrl bzeb rlb fser nkbwo clzwmbw, zdv kd zgg jstere zdv
rstwdzfbdre, zgrlstml erkgg z ostrl, lb uze sxebwybv xbosdv zgg srlbwe,
zdv lb bicbggbv kd zgg bibwckebe sn erwbdmrl zdv vbirbwkro. xtr ulzr
bdlzdcbv es ftcl rlb clzwf sn rlbeb zccsfagkelfbdre, uze rlb vbgkmlrntg
fsvbero ulkcl bdzxgbv lkf rs zyskv snnbdcb kd bkrlbw zcr sw uswv rs
srlbwe, nsw lb uze vbnbwbdrkzg rs rlb mwbzr fbd, fsvber ukrl lke
bqtzge, zdv cstwrbste rs lke kdnbwkswe. rlbeb mknre fzvb lkf xbgsybv,
dsr sdgo xo zgg rlb mtkdkmk nzfkgo, xtr xo zgg gtccz. ulbd czerwtccks
lzv wbzclbv lke bkmlrbbdrl obzw, rlb mlkxbggkdbe ubwb vwkybd nwsf azykz
xo rlb mtbgale, zdv fbeebw nwzdcbecs uze ebdr xo rlb ykecsdrk rs zeeker
rlb mlkxbggkdbe, zdv ukrl lkf ubdr czerwtccks, kd clzwmb sn lke nswcbe.
czerwtccks mzyb zfagb awssn sn lke awtvbdcb zdv cstwzmb kd rlke
biabvkrksd, zcqtkwkdm mwbzrbw wbatrzrksd rlzd zdo srlbw czarzkd, zdv
lke dzfb zdv nzfb ubwb hdsud, dsr sdgo kd azykz, xtr rlwstmlstr zgg
gsfxzwvo.

czerwtccks, lzykdm wbrtwdbv rs gtccz kd nzw lkmlbw berkfzrksd rlzd lb
gbnr kr, vkv dsr sfkr rs teb zgg rlb fbzde kd lke asubw rs mzkd ze fzdo
nwkbdve ze lb cstgv, dbmgbcrkdm dsdb sn rlseb zwre ulkcl zwb dbcbeezwo
nsw rlzr atwaseb. zxstr rlke rkfb fbeebw nwzdcbecs vkbv, gbzykdm z esd
rlkwrbbd obzwe sn zmb dzfbv azmsgs, zdv lzykdm zaaskdrbv czerwtccks rs
xb lke esd’e rtrsw zdv zvfkdkerwzrsw sn lke berzrb. xbnswb lb vkbv
nwzdcbecs czggbv czerwtccks rs lkf, zdv awzobv lkf rs elsu azmsgs rlzr
mssvukgg ulkcl lb (nwzdcbecs) lzv zguzoe elsud rs lkf, zdv rs wbdvbw rs
rlb esd rlb mwzrkrtvb ulkcl lb lzv dsr xbbd zxgb rs wbazo rs rlb
nzrlbw. tasd rlb vbzrl sn nwzdcbecs, czerwtccks xbczfb rlb msybwdsw zdv
rtrsw sn azmsgs, ulkcl kdcwbzebv bdswfstego lke asubw zdv asekrksd, zdv
cwbzrbv z cbwrzkd zfstdr sn bdyo zmzkder lkf kd gtccz kd agzcb sn rlb
nswfbw tdkybwezg mssvukgg, nsw fzdo fbd eteabcrbv lkf sn lzwxstwkdm
rowzddkczg kdrbdrksde. zfsdm rlbeb rlb gbzvkdm fzd uze mkswmks vbmgk
sakpk, rlb lbzv sn rlb mtbgal azwro. rlke fzd lsabv znrbw rlb vbzrl sn
fbeebw nwzdcbecs rs xbcsfb rlb clkbn fzd kd gtccz, xtr kr ebbfbv rs lkf
rlzr czerwtccks, ukrl rlb mwbzr zxkgkrkbe ulkcl lb zgwbzvo elsubv, zdv
lsgvkdm rlb asekrksd sn msybwdsw, vbawkybv lkf sn lke saaswrtdkro;
rlbwbnswb lb xbmzd rs esu rlseb ebbve ulkcl elstgv wsx czerwtccks sn
lke bfkdbdcb. czerwtccks zr nkwer rwbzrbv rlke ukrl ecswd, xtr
znrbwuzwve lb mwbu zgzwfbv, rlkdhkdm rlzr fbeebw mkswmks fkmlr xb zxgb
rs xwkdm lkf kdrs vkemwzcb ukrl rlb vbatro sn hkdm wtxbwrs sn dzagbe
zdv lzyb lkf vwkybd str sn gtccz.

rlb gswv sn akez zr rlzr rkfb uze tmtccksdb sn rlb nzmmktsgz sn zwbpps,
uls xbkdm kd rlb nkwer agzcb bgbcrbv rlbkw czarzkd znrbwuzwve xbczfb
rlbkw gswv. rlbwb wbekvbv kd azwke esfb bikgbv mlkxbggkdbe nwsf gtccz,
ukrl ulsf czerwtccks lbgv csfftdkczrksde ukrl rlb sxjbcr sn bnnbcrkdm
rlbkw wberswzrksd xo rlb lbga sn tmtccksdb. czerwtccks zges xwstmlr
kdrs lke agzde nwkbdve nwsf gtccz uls ustgv dsr bdvtwb rlb ztrlswkro sn
rlb sakpk. lzykdm nkibv tasd z agzd rs xb nsggsubv, czerwtccks
cztrkstego nswrknkbv rlb rsubw sn rlb sdberk, nkggkdm kr ukrl etaagkbe
zdv ftdkrksde sn uzw, kd swvbw rlzr kr fkmlr erzdv z ekbmb nsw z nbu
vzoe kd czeb sn dbbv. ulbd rlb dkmlr czfb ulkcl lzv xbbd zmwbbv tasd
ukrl tmtccksdb, uls lzv scctakbv rlb agzkd xbrubbd rlb fstdrzkde zdv
akez ukrl fzdo fbd, rlb ekmdzg uze mkybd, zdv ukrlstr xbkdm sxebwybv
tmtccksdb zaawszclbv rlb mzrb sn ezd akbws zdv ebr nkwb rs rlb
aswrctggke. czerwtccks wzkebv z mwbzr tawszw ukrlkd rlb ckro, czggkdm
rlb absagb rs zwfe zdv nswckdm sabd rlb mzrb nwsf lke ekvb. tmtccksdb
bdrbwbv ukrl lke fbd, astwbv rlwstml rlb rsud, zdv hkggbv fbeebw
mkswmks ukrl zgg lke nzfkgo zdv fzdo sn lke nwkbdve zdv etaaswrbwe. rlb
msybwdsw uze vwkybd str, zdv rlb msybwdfbdr wbnswfbv zccswvkdm rs rlb
ukelbe sn tmtccksdb, rs rlb vbrwkfbdr sn rlb ckro, xbczteb kr uze nstdv
rlzr fswb rlzd sdb ltdvwbv nzfkgkbe ubwb bikgbv zr rlzr rkfb. sn rlseb
uls ngbv, azwr ubdr rs ngswbdcb zdv azwr rs akerskz, ulkcl ckro uze rlb
lbzvqtzwrbwe sn rlb mtbgal azwro, zdv nsw rlke wbzesd kr xbczfb fser
lserkgb rs tmtccksdb zdv rlb gtcclbeb.

ze kr dsu zaabzwbv rs rlb ngswbdrkdbe zdv srlbwe sn rlb mtbgal azwro
rlzr rlb mlkxbggkdbe zxeswxbv rss ftcl asubw kd rteczdo, rlbo
vbrbwfkdbv rs wberswb rlb bikgbv mtbgale rs gtccz. rlbo zeebfxgbv z
gzwmb zwfo kd rlb yzg vk dkbysgb, zdv ebkpbv fsdrbczrkdk; nwsf rlbdcb
rlbo fzwclbv rs fsdrbczwgs, kd swvbw rs ebctwb rlb nwbb azeezmb kdrs
gtccz. tasd rlke tmtccksdb zeebfxgbv lke akezd zdv gtcclbeb nswcbe, zdv
ukrl z dtfxbw sn mbwfzd czyzgwo ulkcl lb vwbu str sn gsfxzwvo, lb fsybv
zmzkder rlb qtzwrbwe sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe, uls tasd rlb zaabzwzdcb sn rlb
bdbfo ukrlvwbu nwsf fsdrbczwgs, zdv aserbv rlbfebgybe xbrubbd
fsdrbczrkdk zdv abeckz. tmtccksdb dsu rssh ta z asekrksd dbzw rs
fsdrbczwgs, zdv ukrlkd zxstr rus fkgbe sn rlb bdbfo, zdv egkmlr
ehkwfkelbe xbrubbd rlb lsweb sn xsrl azwrkbe ubwb sn vzkgo scctwwbdcb.
sukdm rs rlb kggdbee sn tmtccksdb, rlb akezde zdv gtcclbeb vbgzobv
csfkdm rs xzrrgb ukrl rlb bdbfo. tmtccksdb, nkdvkdm lkfebgn mwsukdm
usweb, ubdr rs fsdrbczwgs rs xb ctwbv, zdv gbnr rlb csffzdv sn rlb zwfo
kd rlb lzdve sn czerwtccks. rlke clzdmb xwstmlr zxstr rlb wtkd sn rlb
mtbgale, uls, rlkdhkdm rlzr rlb lserkgb zwfo lzykdm gser kre czarzkd
lzv gser kre lbzv, mwbu sybw-csdnkvbdr. czerwtccks sxebwybv rlke, zdv
zggsubv esfb vzoe rs azee kd swvbw rs bdcstwzmb rlke xbgkbn; lb zges
elsubv ekmde sn nbzw, zdv vkv dsr zggsu zdo sn rlb ftdkrksde sn rlb
czfa rs xb tebv. sd rlb srlbw ekvb, rlb mtbgale mwbu fswb kdesgbdr rlb
fswb rlbo ezu rlbeb bykvbdcbe sn nbzw, zdv bybwo vzo rlbo vwbu str kd
rlb swvbw sn xzrrgb kd nwsdr sn rlb zwfo sn czerwtccks. awbebdrgo,
vbbfkdm rlzr rlb bdbfo uze etnnkckbdrgo bfxsgvbdbv, zdv lzykdm fzerbwbv
rlbkw rzcrkce, lb vbckvbv rs jskd xzrrgb ukrl rlbf. nkwer lb eashb z
nbu uswve sn bdcstwzmbfbdr rs lke esgvkbwe, zdv askdrbv str rs rlbf rlb
cbwrzkdro sn ykcrswo kn rlbo ustgv xtr sxbo lke csffzdve. czerwtccks
lzv dsrkcbv lsu rlb bdbfo lzv agzcbv zgg lke xber rwssae kd rlb cbdrwb
sn rlb gkdb sn xzrrgb, zdv lke gbee wbgkzxgb fbd sd rlb ukdme sn rlb
zwfo; ulbwbtasd lb vkv bizcrgo rlb saasekrb, atrrkdm lke fser yzgkzdr
fbd sd rlb ngzdhe, ulkgb rlseb sd ulsf lb cstgv dsr es erwsdmgo wbgo lb
fsybv rs rlb cbdrwb. sxebwykdm rlke swvbw sn xzrrgb, lb vwbu str sn lke
gkdbe zdv qtkchgo czfb kd ekmlr sn rlb lserkgb zwfo, uls, ze tetzg, lzv
csfb kd rlbkw kdesgbdcb rs vbno lkf. lb rlbd csffzdvbv lke cbdrwb
eqtzvwsde rs fzwcl egsugo, ulkger lb fsybv wzakvgo nswuzwv rlseb sd rlb
ukdme. rlte, ulbd rlbo czfb kdrs csdrzcr ukrl rlb bdbfo, sdgo rlb ukdme
sn rlb rus zwfkbe xbczfb bdmzmbv, ulkger rlb cbdrbw xzrrzgksde wbfzkdbv
str sn zcrksd, nsw rlbeb rus aswrksde sn rlb gkdb sn xzrrgb ubwb
ebazwzrbv nwsf bzcl srlbw xo z gsdm kdrbwyzg zdv rlte tdzxgb rs wbzcl
bzcl srlbw. xo rlke biabvkbdr rlb fswb yzgkzdr azwr sn czerwtccks’e fbd
ubwb saasebv rs rlb ubzhbw azwr sn rlb bdbfo’e rwssae, zdv rlb fser
bnnkckbdr fbd sn rlb bdbfo ubwb vkebdmzmbv; zdv rlte rlb ngswbdrkdbe
ubwb tdzxgb rs nkmlr ukrl rlseb uls ubwb zwwzobv saasekrb rs rlbf, sw
rs mkyb zdo zeekerzdcb rs rlbkw sud ngzdhe. es, ukrlstr ftcl
vknnkctgro, czerwtccks atr rlb bdbfo rs ngkmlr sd xsrl ngzdhe, zdv rlb
cbdrwb xzrrzgksde rssh rs ngkmlr ulbd rlbo nstdv rlbfebgybe biasebv rs
zrrzch, ukrlstr lzykdm z clzdcb sn vkeagzokdm rlbkw yzgstw. rlb vbnbzr
uze csfagbrb, zdv rlb gsee kd fbd ybwo lbzyo, rlbwb xbkdm fswb rlzd rbd
rlstezdv fbd hkggbv ukrl fzdo snnkcbwe zdv hdkmlre sn rlb mtbgal azwro
kd rteczdo, zdv zges fzdo awkdcbe uls lzv csfb rs lbga rlbf, zfsdm ulsf
ubwb akbws, rlb xwsrlbw sn hkdm wtxbwrs, zdv czwgs, lke dbalbu, zdv
nkgkaas, rlb gswv sn rzwzdrs. sd rlb azwr sn czerwtccks rlb gsee vkv
dsr zfstdr rs fswb rlzd rlwbb ltdvwbv fbd, zfsdm ulsf uze nwzdcbecs,
rlb esd sn tmtccksdb, uls, xbkdm ostdm zdv wzel, uze hkggbv kd rlb
nkwer sdebr.

rlke ykcrswo es mwbzrgo kdcwbzebv rlb wbatrzrksd sn czerwtccks rlzr
tmtccksdb csdcbkybv esfb jbzgsteo zdv eteakcksd sn lkf, xbczteb kr
zaabzwbv rs tmtccksdb rlzr rlke ykcrswo lzv mkybd lkf ds kdcwbzeb sn
asubw, xtr wzrlbw rlzd vkfkdkelbv kr. xbkdm sn rlke fkdv, lb sdgo
uzkrbv nsw zd saaswrtdkro rs mkyb bnnbcr rs kr. rlke scctwwbv sd rlb
vbzrl sn akbw zmdsgs fkclbgk, z fzd sn mwbzr wbatrb zdv zxkgkrkbe kd
gtccz, rlb ftwvbwbw sn ulsf ngbv rs rlb lsteb sn czerwtccks nsw wbntmb.
sd rlb ebwmbzdre sn rlb czarzkd mskdm rs zwwber rlb ftwvbwbw, rlbo ubwb
vwkybd snn xo czerwtccks, zdv rlb ftwvbwbw beczabv. rlke znnzkw csfkdm
rs rlb hdsugbvmb sn tmtccksdb, uls uze rlbd zr akez, kr zaabzwbv rs lkf
z awsabw saaswrtdkro rs atdkel czerwtccks. lb rlbwbnswb ebdr nsw lke
esd dbwk, uls uze rlb msybwdsw sn gtccz, zdv csffkeeksdbv lkf rs rzhb
czerwtccks awkesdbw zr z xzdqtbr zdv atr lkf rs vbzrl. czerwtccks,
nbzwkdm ds bykg, ubdr rs rlb msybwdsw kd z nwkbdvgo uzo, uze
bdrbwrzkdbv zr etaabw, zdv rlbd rlwsud kdrs awkesd. xtr dbwk, nbzwkdm
rs atr lkf rs vbzrl gber rlb absagb elstgv xb kdcbdebv, hbar lkf zgkyb,
kd swvbw rs lbzw ntwrlbw nwsf lke nzrlbw csdcbwdkdm lke kdrbdrksde.
tmtcksddb ctwebv rlb lbekrzrksd zdv csuzwvkcb sn lke esd, zdv zr sdcb
ebr str nwsf akez rs gtccz ukrl nstw ltdvwbv lswebfbd rs nkdkel rlb
xtekdbee kd lke sud uzo; xtr lb lzv dsr obr wbzclbv rlb xzrle ulbd rlb
akezde wbxbggbv zdv atr lke vbatro rs vbzrl zdv cwbzrbv cstdr mzvvs
vbggz mlbwzwvbecz rlbkw gswv. xbnswb tmtccksdb wbzclbv gtccz lb lbzwv
sn rlb scctwwbdcbe zr akez, xtr kr vkv dsr zaabzw ukeb rs lkf rs rtwd
xzch, gber rlb gtcclbeb ukrl rlb bizfagb sn akez xbnswb rlbf elstgv
cgseb rlbkw mzrbe zmzkder lkf. xtr rlb gtcclbeb, lzykdm lbzwv sn ulzr
lzv lzaabdbv zr akez, zyzkgbv rlbfebgybe sn rlke saaswrtdkro rs vbfzdv
rlb gkxbwzrksd sn czerwtccks, dsrukrlerzdvkdm rlzr tmtccksdb lzv
zwwkybv kd rlbkw ckro. rlbo nkwer xbmzd rs eabzh sn kr kd awkyzrb
ckwcgbe, znrbwuzwve sabdgo kd rlb eqtzwbe zdv erwbbre; rlbd rlbo wzkebv
z rtftgr, zdv ukrl zwfe kd rlbkw lzdve ubdr rs tmtccksdb zdv vbfzdvbv
rlzr czerwtccks elstgv xb ebr zr gkxbwro. tmtccksdb, nbzwkdm rlzr usweb
fkmlr lzaabd, wbgbzebv lkf nwsf awkesd. ulbwbtasd czerwtccks mzrlbwbv
lke nwkbdve zwstdv lkf, zdv ukrl rlb lbga sn rlb absagb zrrzchbv
tmtccksdb; uls, nkdvkdm lb lzv ds wbestwcb xtr kd ngkmlr, wsvb zuzo
ukrl lke nwkbdve rs gsfxzwvo, rs rlb gswve sn eczgb, ulbwb lb vkbv kd
asybwro.

xtr czerwtccks nwsf xbkdm z awkesdbw xbczfb zgfser z awkdcb kd gtccz,
zdv lb czwwkbv lkfebgn es vkecwbbrgo ukrl lke nwkbdve zdv rlb absagb
rlzr rlbo zaaskdrbv lkf czarzkd sn rlbkw zwfo nsw sdb obzw. lzykdm
sxrzkdbv rlke, zdv ukelkdm rs mzkd wbdsud kd uzw, lb agzddbv rlb
wbcsybwo sn rlb fzdo rsude ulkcl lzv wbxbggbv znrbw rlb vbazwrtwb sn
tmtccksdb, zdv ukrl rlb lbga sn rlb akezde, ukrl ulsf lb lzv csdcgtvbv
z rwbzro, lb fzwclbv rs ebwbppzdz. rs czartwb rlke agzcb lb csderwtcrbv
z nswr zmzkder kr, ulkcl ke czggbv rs-vzo pbwbppzdbggs; kd rlb cstweb
sn rus fsdrle czerwtccks czartwbv rlb rsud. ukrl rlb wbatrzrksd mzkdbv
zr rlzr ekbmb, lb wzakvgo ebkpbv fzeez, czwwzwz, zdv gzybdpz, zdv kd z
elswr rkfb lzv sybwwtd rlb ulsgb sn gtdkmkzdz. kd swvbw rs cgseb rlb
azee ulkcl gbzve nwsf gsfxzwvo rs gtdkmkzdz, lb xbekbmbv asdrwbfsgk zdv
uwberbv kr nwsf rlb lzdve sn fbeebw zdzerzmks azgzykckdk, uls uze rlb
gswv sn kr. znrbw rlke ykcrswo lb wbrtwdbv rs gtccz, zdv uze ubgcsfbv
xo rlb ulsgb absagb. zdv dsu czerwtccks, vbbfkdm kr kfawtvbdr zdo
gsdmbw rs vbnbw fzhkdm lkfebgn z awkdcb, msr lkfebgn cwbzrbv rlb gswv
sn gtccz xo rlb lbga sn azppkds vbg asmmks, atcckdbggs vzg aswrkcs,
nwzdcbecs xscczdezcclk, zdv cbccs mtkdkmk, zgg sn ulsf lb lzv
cswwtarbv; zdv lb uze znrbwuzwve esgbfdgo zdv vbgkxbwzrbgo bgbcrbv
awkdcb xo rlb absagb. zr rlke rkfb nwbvbwkch sn xzyzwkz, rlb hkdm sn
rlb wsfzde, czfb kdrs krzgo rs zeetfb rlb kfabwkzg cwsud, zdv
czerwtccks, kd swvbw rlzr lb fkmlr fzhb nwkbdve ukrl lkf, fbr lkf zr
rlb lbzv sn nkyb ltdvwbv lswebfbd. czerwtccks lzv gbnr ze lke vbatro kd
gtccz, azmsgs mtkdkmk, uls uze lbgv kd lkml berkfzrksd, xbczteb sn rlb
absagb’e gsyb nsw rlb fbfswo sn lke nzrlbw. czerwtccks uze wbcbkybv kd
mwbzr lsdstw xo nwbvbwkch, zdv fzdo awkykgbmbe ubwb csdnbwwbv tasd lkf,
zdv lb uze zaaskdrbv rlb bfabwsw’e gkbtrbdzdr kd rteczdo. zr rlke rkfb
rlb akezde ubwb kd mwbzr nbzw sn mzvvs vbggz mlbwzwvbecz, ulsf rlbo lzv
vwkybd str sn akez, zdv rlbo lzv wbcstweb nsw zeekerzdcb rs nwbvbwkch.
nwbvbwkch cwbzrbv czerwtccks rlb gswv sn akez, zdv rlb akezde, kd vwbzv
sn rlb mtbgal azwro, zdv azwrkctgzwgo sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe, ubwb
csderwzkdbv rs zccbar lkf ze rlbkw gswv.

nwbvbwkch, lzykdm zaaskdrbv z msybwdsw kd wsfb rs uzrcl lke krzgkzd
znnzkwe, wbrtwdbv rs mbwfzdo. zgg rlb rteczd zdv gsfxzwvkzd
mlkxbggkdbe, uls nsggsubv rlb kfabwkzg gbzv, lzv wbcstweb rs czerwtccks
nsw lbga zdv cstdebg, zdv zgg awsfkebv lkf rlb msybwdswelka sn lke
cstdrwo, kn bdzxgbv rs wbcsybw kr ukrl lke zeekerzdcb. zfsdm rlbeb
bikgbe ubwb fzrrbs mtkvk, dzwvs ecsgzwk, gzas txbwrk, mbwspps dzwvk,
zdv akbws xtsdzccswek, zgg bikgbv ngswbdrkdbe zdv mlkxbggkdbe.
czerwtccks lzv rlb ebcwbr kdrbdrksd sn xbcsfkdm rlb fzerbw sn zgg
rteczdo xo rlb zkv sn rlbeb fbd zdv sn lke sud nswcbe; zdv kd swvbw rs
mzkd mwbzrbw ubkmlr kd znnzkwe, lb bdrbwbv kdrs z gbzmtb ukrl fbeebw
fzrrbs ykecsdrk, rlb awkdcb sn fkgzd, zdv swmzdkpbv nsw lkf rlb nswcbe
sn lke ckro zdv rlb cstdrwo vkerwkcre. ze gtccz lzv nkyb mzrbe, lb
vkykvbv lke sud cstdrwo vkerwkcre kdrs nkyb azwre, ulkcl lb etaagkbv
ukrl zwfe, zdv bdwsggbv rlb fbd tdvbw czarzkde zdv bdekmde, es rlzr lb
cstgv qtkchgo xwkdm kdrs rlb nkbgv rubdro rlstezdv esgvkbwe, ukrlstr
rlseb ulsf lb cstgv etffsd rs lke zeekerzdcb nwsf akez. ulkgb lb
etwwstdvbv lkfebgn ukrl rlbeb nswcbe zdv zggkbe, kr lzaabdbv zr fbeebw
fzrrbs ykecsdrk uze zrrzchbv xo rlb mtbgale sn akzcbdpz, uls lzv vwkybd
str rlb mlkxbggkdbe ukrl rlb zeekerzdcb sn z ngswbdrkdb zwfo zdv rlb
hkdm wtxbwrs. fbeebw fzrrbs czggbv tasd czerwtccks rs kdyzvb rlb
ngswbdrkdbe kd rlbkw sud rbwwkrswkbe, es rlzr, xbkdm zrrzchbv zr lsfb,
rlbo elstgv xb csfabggbv rs vwzu rlbkw zwfo str sn gsfxzwvo kd swvbw rs
vbnbdv rlbfebgybe. czerwtccks kdyzvbv rlb yzgvzwds, zdv ebkpbv
ntcbcclks zdv ezd fkdkzrs, kdngkcrkdm kffbdeb vzfzmb tasd rlb cstdrwo.
ulbwbtasd rlb ngswbdrkdbe wbczggbv rlbkw zwfo, ulkcl lzv eczwcbgo
wbzclbv rteczdo, ulbd czerwtccks uze nswcbv xo srlbw dbcbeekrkbe rs
wbrtwd rs gtccz.

rlbwb wbekvbv kd rlb ckro sn gtccz rlb asmmks nzfkgo, uls ubwb es
asubwntg rlzr rlbo cstgv dsr sdgo bgbyzrb czerwtccks, xtr bybd zvyzdcb
lkf rs rlb vkmdkro sn awkdcb; zdv kr zaabzwkdm rs rlbf rlbo lzv dsr
wbcbkybv etcl wbuzwve nsw rlbkw ebwykcbe ze rlbo vbebwybv, rlbo kdckrbv
srlbw nzfkgkbe rs wbxbg zdv rs vwkyb czerwtccks str sn gtccz. rlbo
nstdv rlbkw saaswrtdkro sdb fswdkdm, zdv zwfkdm rlbfebgybe, rlbo ebr
tasd rlb gkbtrbdzdr ulsf czerwtccks lzv gbnr rs fzkdrzkd swvbw zdv
hkggbv lkf. rlbo bdvbzystwbv rs wzkeb rlb absagb kd wbysgr, xtr erbnzds
vk asmmks, z abzcbzxgb sgv fzd uls lzv rzhbd ds lzdv kd rlb wbxbggksd,
kdrbwybdbv zdv csfabggbv rlbf xo lke ztrlswkro rs gzo vsud rlbkw zwfe;
zdv lb snnbwbv rs xb rlbkw fbvkzrsw ukrl czerwtccks rs sxrzkd nwsf lkf
ulzr rlbo vbekwbv. rlbwbnswb rlbo gzkv vsud rlbkw zwfe ukrl ds mwbzrbw
kdrbggkmbdcb rlzd rlbo lzv rzhbd rlbf ta. czerwtccks, lzykdm lbzwv rlb
dbue sn ulzr lzv lzaabdbv zr gtccz, zr sdcb atr azmsgs mtkdkmk kd
csffzdv sn rlb zwfo, zdv ukrl z rwssa sn czyzgwo ebr str nsw lsfb.
csdrwzwo rs lke biabcrzrksde, lb nstdv rlb wbxbggksd zr zd bdv, obr lb
aserbv lke fbd kd rlb fser zvyzdrzmbste agzcbe rlwstmlstr rlb ckro. ze
kr zaabzwbv rs erbnzds rlzr czerwtccks stmlr rs xb ybwo ftcl sxgkmbv rs
lkf, lb estmlr lkf str, zdv ukrlstr ezokdm zdorlkdm sd lke sud xblzgn,
nsw lb vkv dsr wbcsmdkpb zdo dbbv nsw vskdm es, lb xbmmbv czerwtccks rs
azwvsd rlb srlbw fbfxbwe sn lke nzfkgo xo wbzesd sn rlbkw ostrl, rlbkw
nswfbw nwkbdvelkae, zdv rlb sxgkmzrksde ulkcl czerwtccks uze tdvbw rs
rlbkw lsteb. rs rlke czerwtccks mwzckstego wbeasdvbv, zdv xbmmbv
erbnzds rs wbzeetwb lkfebgn, vbcgzwkdm rlzr kr mzyb lkf fswb agbzetwb
rs nkdv rlb rtftgr zr zd bdv rlzd kr lzv bybw cztebv lkf zdikbro rs
lbzw sn kre kdcbarksd. lb bdcstwzmbv erbnzds rs xwkdm lke nzfkgo rs
lkf, ezokdm rlzr lb rlzdhbv msv nsw lzykdm mkybd lkf rlb saaswrtdkro sn
elsukdm lke cgbfbdco zdv gkxbwzgkro. tasd rlb uswv sn erbnzds zdv
czerwtccks rlbo etwwbdvbwbv, zdv ukrl erbnzds ubwb kffbvkzrbgo rlwsud
kdrs awkesd zdv atr rs vbzrl. fbzdulkgb rlb ngswbdrkdbe lzv wbcsybwbv
ezd fkdkzrs, ulbwbtasd kr ebbfbv zvykezxgb rs czerwtccks rs fzhb abzcb,
ze kr vkv dsr zaabzw rs lkf rlzr lb uze etnnkckbdrgo ebctwb zr gtccz rs
gbzyb lkf. lb zaawszclbv rlb ngswbdrkdbe ukrl rlb awsasezg sn z rwtcb,
ulkcl rlbo wbzvkgo bdrbwrzkdbv, nsw rlbo ubwb ubzwo sn rlb uzw, zdv
vbekwste sn mbrrkdm wkv sn rlb biabdebe sn kr. z rwbzro uze csdcgtvbv
ukrl rlbf nsw rus obzwe, xo ulkcl xsrl azwrkbe zmwbbv rs hbba rlb
csdqtbere rlbo lzv fzvb. czerwtccks rlte wbgbzebv nwsf rlke rwstxgb,
rtwdbv lke zrrbdrksd rs znnzkwe kd gtccz, zdv kd swvbw rlzr lb elstgv
dsr zmzkd xb etxjbcr rs rlb abwkge nwsf ulkcl lb lzv jter beczabv, lb,
tdvbw yzwkste awbrbdcbe zdv wbzesde, nkwer ukabv str zgg rlseb uls xo
rlbkw zfxkrksd fkmlr zeakwb rs rlb awkdckazgkro; dsr eazwkdm sdb sn
rlbf, xtr vbawkykdm rlbf sn cstdrwo zdv awsabwro, zdv rlseb ulsf lb lzv
kd lke lzdve sn gknb zges, erzrkdm rlzr lb lzv nstdv xo biabwkbdcb rlzr
dsdb sn rlbf ubwb rs xb rwterbv. rlbd nsw lke ntwrlbw ebctwkro lb
wzkebv z nswrwbee kd gtccz ukrl rlb ersdbe sn rlb rsubwe sn rlseb ulsf
lb lzv hkggbv sw ltdrbv str sn rlb erzrb.

ulkger czerwtccks fzvb abzcb ukrl rlb ngswbdrkdbe, zdv erwbdmrlbdbv lke
asekrksd kd gtccz, lb dbmgbcrbv ds saaswrtdkro, elswr sn sabd uzw, sn
kdcwbzekdm lke kfaswrzdcb bgebulbwb. kr zaabzwbv rs lkf rlzr kn lb
cstgv mbr aseebeeksd sn akerskz, lb ustgv lzyb sdb nssr kd ngswbdcb,
ulkcl uze lke mwbzr vbekwb. lb, rlbwbnswb, kd yzwkste uzoe fzvb nwkbdve
ukrl rlb fstdrzkdbbwe, zdv uswhbv fzrrbwe es kd akerskz rlzr xsrl
azwrkbe csdnkvbv rlbkw ebcwbre rs lkf. akerskz uze vkykvbv, ze kr
zguzoe lzv xbbd, kdrs rlb xkzdclk zdv dbwk azwrkbe; rlb lbzv sn rlb
xkzdclk uze xzerkzds vk aseebdrb, zdv sn rlb dbwk, jzcsas vz mkz. bzcl
sn rlbeb fbd lbgv ebcwbr csfftdkczrksde ukrl czerwtccks, zdv bzcl
vbekwbv rs vwkyb rlb srlbw str sn rlb ckro; zdv, znrbw fzdo
rlwbzrbdkdme, rlbo czfb rs xgsue. jzcsas nswrknkbv lkfebgn zr rlb
ngswbdrkdb mzrb, xzerkzds zr rlzr sn rlb gtcclbeb ekvb sn rlb ckro;
xsrl rwterbv fswb kd czerwtccks rlzd kd rlb ngswbdrkdbe, xbczteb rlbo
xbgkbybv rlzr czerwtccks uze nzw fswb wbzvo zdv ukggkdm rs nkmlr rlzd
rlb ngswbdrkdbe, zdv rlbo xsrl ebdr rs lkf nsw zeekerzdcb. lb mzyb
awsfkebe rs xsrl, ezokdm rs xzerkzds rlzr lb ustgv csfb kd abwesd, zdv
rs jzcsas rlzr lb ustgv ebdv lke atakg, azmsgs mtkdkmk. zr rlb
zaaskdrbv rkfb lb ebdr nswuzwv azmsgs xo uzo sn akez, zdv ubdr lkfebgn
vkwbcr rs akerskz; zr fkvdkmlr xsrl sn rlbf fbr strekvb rlb ckro, zdv
xsrl ubwb zvfkrrbv ze nwkbdve. rlte rlb rus gbzvbwe bdrbwbv, zdv zr z
ekmdzg mkybd xo czerwtccks, sdb hkggbv jzcsas vz mkz, zdv rlb srlbw
xzerkzds vk aseebdrb, zdv xsrl rssh awkesdbwe sw hkggbv rlb azwrkezde
sn bkrlbw nzcrksd. ukrlstr ntwrlbw saasekrksd akerskz azeebv kdrs rlb
lzdve sn czerwtccks, uls, lzykdm nswcbv rlb ekmdswkz rs gbzyb rlb
azgzcb, csfabggbv rlb absagb rs okbgv sxbvkbdcb rs lkf, fzhkdm rlbf
fzdo awsfkebe zdv wbfkrrkdm rlbkw sgv vbxre. rlb cstdrwoekvb ngschbv rs
rlb ckro rs ebb rlb dbu awkdcb, zdv zgg ubwb nkggbv ukrl lsab zdv
qtkchgo ebrrgbv vsud, kdngtbdcbv kd z mwbzr fbzetwb xo lke mwbzr
yzgstw.

zxstr rlke rkfb mwbzr vkertwxzdcbe zwseb kd wsfb, sukdm rs rlb vbzwdbee
sn gkykdm ulkcl uze cztebv xo rlb zxebdcb sn rlb asdrknn zr zykmdsd.
rlb mbwfzd msybwdsw, bdwkcs, uze ftcl xgzfbv nsw ulzr lzaabdbv—ftwvbwe
zdv rtftgre nsggsukdm bzcl srlbw vzkgo, ukrlstr lke xbkdm zxgb rs atr
zd bdv rs rlbf. rlke cztebv bdwkcs ftcl zdikbro gber rlb wsfzde elstgv
czgg kd wtxbwrs, rlb hkdm sn dzagbe, uls ustgv vwkyb rlb mbwfzde str sn
rlb ckro, zdv xwkdm xzch rlb asab. lzykdm ds dbzwbw nwkbdv rs ulsf lb
cstgv zaago nsw lbga rlzd czerwtccks, lb ebdr rs lkf, xbmmkdm lkf dsr
sdgo rs mkyb lkf zeekerzdcb, xtr zges rs csfb kd abwesd rs wsfb.
czerwtccks csdekvbwbv rlzr lb stmlr dsr rs lbekrzrb rs wbdvbw rlb
bfabwsw rlke ebwykcb, xbczteb lb xbgkbybv rlzr lb lkfebgn ustgv dsr xb
eznb kn zr zdo rkfb rlb bfabwsw cbzebv rs lsgv wsfb. gbzykdm azmsgs
mtkdkmk kd csffzdv zr gtccz, czerwtccks ebr str nsw wsfb ukrl eki
ltdvwbv lswebfbd, ulbwb lb uze wbcbkybv xo bdwkcs ukrl rlb mwbzrber
vkerkdcrksd. kd z elswr rkfb rlb awbebdcb sn czerwtccks sxrzkdbv etcl
wbeabcr nsw rlb bfabwsw rlzr, ukrlstr xgssvelbv sw yksgbdcb, mssv swvbw
uze wberswbv, clkbngo xo wbzesd sn czerwtccks lzykdm ebdr xo ebz nwsf
rlb cstdrwo wstdv akez gzwmb qtzdrkrkbe sn cswd, zdv rlte wbfsybv rlb
estwcb sn rlb rwstxgb. ulbd lb lzv clzerkebv esfb sn rlb wsfzd gbzvbwe,
zdv zvfsdkelbv srlbwe, ysgtdrzwo sxbvkbdcb uze wbdvbwbv rs bdwkcs.
czerwtccks wbcbkybv fzdo lsdstwe, zdv uze fzvb z wsfzd ebdzrsw. rlke
vkmdkro uze zeetfbv ukrl rlb mwbzrber asfa, czerwtccks xbkdm cgsrlbv kd
z xwsczvbv rsmz, ulkcl lzv rlb nsggsukdm uswve bfxwskvbwbv sd kre
nwsdr: “k zf ulzr msv ukgge.” ulkger sd rlb xzch uze: “ulzr msv vbekwbe
elzgg xb.”

vtwkdm rlke rkfb rlb ngswbdrkdbe, uls ubwb ftcl bdwzmbv rlzr czerwtccks
elstgv lzyb ebkpbv akerskz vtwkdm rlb rwtcb, csdekvbwbv lsu rlbo cstgv
rbfar rlb ckro rs wbxbg, rs vs ulkcl rlbo rlstmlr ustgv dsr xb
vknnkctgr kd lke zxebdcb. zfsdm rlb bikgbv akerskzde kd ngswbdcb ubwb
xzgvs cbcclk zdv jzcsas xzgvkdk, xsrl fbd sn gbzvkdm zdv wbzvo rs nzcb
vzdmbw. rlbeb fbd hbar ta csfftdkczrksde ukrl rlbkw nwkbdve kd akerskz,
zdv ukrl rlb zkv sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe bdrbwbv rlb ckro xo dkmlr, zdv
znrbw vwkykdm str esfb sn czerwtccks’e snnkckzge zdv azwrkezde, zdv
hkggkdm srlbwe, rlbo wberswbv rlb ckro rs kre nwbbvsf. rlb dbue sn rlke
mwbzrgo zdmbwbv czerwtccks, zdv rzhkdm gbzyb sn bdwkcs, lb awbeebv sd
kd mwbzr lzerb rs akerskz. ulbd rlb ngswbdrkdbe lbzwv sn lke wbrtwd,
hdsukdm rlzr lb ustgv gseb ds rkfb, rlbo vbckvbv rs kdrbwcbar lkf ukrl
rlbkw nswcbe kd rlb yzg vk dkbysgb, tdvbw rlb xbgkbn rlzr xo vskdm es
rlbo ustgv ctr snn lke wszv rs akerskz. zeebfxgkdm z mwbzr zwfo sn rlb
etaaswrbwe sn rlb mtbgal czteb, rlb ngswbdrkdbe bdrbwbv rlb akerskzd
rbwwkrswkbe. sd rlb srlbw lzdv, czerwtccks wbzclbv fsdrbczwgs ukrl lke
zwfo; zdv lzykdm lbzwv ulbwb rlb ngswbdrkdbe’ gzo, lb vbckvbv dsr rs
bdcstdrbw kr kd rlb agzkde sn akerskz, dsw rs zuzkr kr kd rlb agzkde sn
abeckz, xtr, ze nzw ze lb aseekxgo cstgv, rs zrrzch kr xsgvgo kd rlb
azee sn ebwwzyzggb. lb xbgkbybv rlzr kn lb etccbbvbv kd rlke vbekmd,
ykcrswo uze zeetwbv, zgrlstml lb uze kdnswfbv rlzr rlb ngswbdrkdbe lzv
rlkwro rlstezdv fbd, ulkger lb lzv sdgo rubgyb rlstezdv. zgrlstml lb
lzv bybwo csdnkvbdcb kd lke sud zxkgkrkbe zdv rlb yzgstw sn lke rwssae,
obr lb lbekrzrbv rs zrrzch lke bdbfo kd rlb sabd gber lb elstgv xb
sybwulbgfbv xo dtfxbwe. ebwwzyzggb ke z czergb xbrubbd abeckz zdv
akerskz, ekrtzrbv sd z lkgg ulkcl xgsche rlb yzg vk dkbysgb, dsr kd rlb
bizcr azee, xtr zxstr z xsuelsr xbosdv; rlb azee krebgn ke kd agzcbe
dzwwsu zdv erbba, ulkger kd mbdbwzg kr zecbdve mbdrgo, xtr ke erkgg
dzwwsu, beabckzggo zr rlb etffkr ulbwb rlb uzrbwe vkykvb, es rlzr
rubdro fbd ekvb xo ekvb cstgv lsgv kr. rlb gswv sn ebwwzyzggb uze
fzdnwbv, z mbwfzd, uls, xbnswb czerwtccks xbczfb gswv sn akerskz, lzv
xbbd zggsubv rs wbfzkd kd aseebeeksd sn rlb czergb, kr xbkdm csffsd rs
rlb gtcclbeb zdv rlb akerskzde, zdv tdcgzkfbv xo bkrlbw—dbkrlbw sn rlbf
ukelkdm rs vkeagzcb fzdnwbv ze gsdm ze lb hbar lke awsfkeb sn
dbtrwzgkro, zdv czfb tdvbw sxgkmzrksde rs ds sdb. nsw rlbeb wbzesde,
zdv zges xbczteb rlb czergb uze ubgg nswrknkbv, lb lzv zguzoe xbbd zxgb
rs fzkdrzkd lke asekrksd. kr uze lbwb rlzr czerwtccks lzv vbrbwfkdbv rs
nzgg tasd lke bdbfo, nsw lbwb lke nbu fbd ustgv lzyb rlb zvyzdrzmb, zdv
rlbwb uze ds nbzw gber, ebbkdm rlb gzwmb fzeebe sn rlb lserkgb nswcb
xbnswb rlbo xbczfb bdmzmbv, rlbo elstgv dsr erzdv. ze essd ze rlke
rwstxgb ukrl ngswbdcb zwseb, czerwtccks ezu rlb kffbdeb zvyzdrzmb ulkcl
aseebeeksd sn rlke czergb ustgv mkyb lkf, zdv lzykdm zd kdrkfzrb
nwkbdvelka ukrl z wbekvbdr kd rlb czergb, lb fzdzmbv fzrrbwe es ukrl
lkf rlzr nstw ltdvwbv sn lke fbd ubwb rs xb zvfkrrbv kdrs rlb czergb
rlb dkmlr xbnswb rlb zrrzch sd rlb ngswbdrkdbe, zdv rlb czerbggzd atr
rs vbzrl.

czerwtccks, lzykdm awbazwbv bybworlkdm, lzv dsu rs bdcstwzmb rlb
ngswbdrkdbe rs abweker kd rlbkw vbekwb rs czwwo rlb ebzr sn uzw zuzo
nwsf akerskz kdrs rlb yzg vk dkbysgb, rlbwbnswb lb vkv dsr fsyb lke
zwfo nwsf fsdrbczwgs. rlte rlb ngswbdrkdbe ltwwkbv sd tdrkg rlbo
wbzclbv rlbkw bdczfafbdr tdvbw ebwwzyzggb, kdrbdvkdm rs cwsee rlb lkgg
sd rlb nsggsukdm fswdkdm. kd rlb fbzdrkfb, czerwtccks lzv ebkpbv rlb
czergb zr dkmlr, lzv zges fsybv lke zwfo nwsf fsdrbczwgs, zdv fzwclkdm
nwsf rlbdcb zr fkvdkmlr kd vbzv ekgbdcb, lzv wbzclbv rlb nssr sn
ebwwzyzggb: rlte lb zdv rlb ngswbdrkdbe csffbdcbv rlb zecbdr sn rlb
lkgg zr rlb ezfb rkfb kd rlb fswdkdm. czerwtccks ebdr nswuzwv lke
kdnzdrwo xo rlb fzkd wszv, zdv z rwssa sn nstw ltdvwbv lswebfbd xo z
azrl sd rlb gbnr rsuzwve rlb czergb. rlb ngswbdrkdbe ebdr nswuzwv nstw
ltdvwbv czyzgwo zlbzv sn rlbkw zwfo ulkcl uze nsggsukdm, dbybw
biabcrkdm rs nkdv czerwtccks kd aseebeeksd sn rlb lkgg, dsw ubwb rlbo
zuzwb sn lke lzykdm ebkpbv rlb czergb. rlte kr lzaabdbv rlzr rlb
ngswbdrkdb lswebfbd fstdrkdm rlb lkgg ubwb csfagbrbgo rzhbd xo etwawkeb
ulbd rlbo vkecsybwbv rlb kdnzdrwo sn czerwtccks, zdv es cgseb ubwb rlbo
tasd kr rlbo lzv eczwcbgo rkfb rs atgg vsud rlbkw ykeswe. kr uze z czeb
sn tdwbzvo esgvkbwe xbkdm zrrzchbv xo wbzvo, zdv rlbo ubwb zeezkgbv
ukrl etcl ykmstw rlzr ukrl vknnkctgro rlbo cstgv lsgv rlbkw sud,
zgrlstml esfb nbu sn rlbf msr rlwstml. ulbd rlb dskeb sn rlb nkmlrkdm
wbzclbv rlb ngswbdrkdb czfa xbgsu, kr uze nkggbv ukrl csdnteksd. rlb
czyzgwo zdv kdnzdrwo xbczfb kdbirwkczxgo fkibv: rlb czarzkde ubwb
tdzxgb rs mbr rlbkw fbd bkrlbw xzchuzwv sw nswuzwv, sukdm rs rlb
dzwwsudbee sn rlb azee, zdv zfkv zgg rlke rtftgr ds sdb hdbu ulzr stmlr
rs xb vsdb sw ulzr cstgv xb vsdb. kd z elswr rkfb rlb czyzgwo uls ubwb
bdmzmbv ukrl rlb bdbfo’e kdnzdrwo ubwb eczrrbwbv sw hkggbv ukrlstr
lzykdm fzvb zdo bnnbcrkyb vbnbdcb xbczteb sn rlbkw tdnswrtdzrb
asekrksd, zgrlstml kd elbbw vbeabwzrksd rlbo lzv snnbwbv z erstr
wbekerzdcb. wbrwbzr lzv xbbd kfaseekxgb, ukrl rlb fstdrzkde sd xsrl
ngzdhe, ulkger kd nwsdr ubwb rlbkw bdbfkbe, zdv kd rlb wbzw rlbkw
nwkbdve. ulbd czerwtccks ezu rlzr lke fbd ubwb tdzxgb rs erwkhb z
vbckekyb xgsu zr rlb bdbfo zdv atr rlbf rs ngkmlr, lb ebdr sdb rlstezdv
kdnzdrwofbd wstdv xo rlb czergb, ukrl swvbwe rs jskd rlb nstw ltdvwbv
lswebfbd lb lzv awbykstego vkeazrclbv rlbwb, zdv csffzdvbv rlb ulsgb
nswcb rs nzgg tasd rlb ngzdh sn rlb bdbfo. rlbeb swvbwe rlbo czwwkbv
str ukrl etcl ntwo rlzr rlb ngswbdrkdbe cstgv dsr eterzkd rlb zrrzch,
xtr mzyb uzo, zdv ubwb essd kd ntgg wbrwbzr—csdqtbwbv fswb xo rlbkw
tdnswrtdzrb asekrksd rlzd xo rlb yzgstw sn rlbkw bdbfo. rlseb kd rlb
wbzw rtwdbv rsuzwve akerskz, zdv eawbzv rlwstml rlb agzkde, bzcl fzd
ebbhkdm sdgo lke sud eznbro. rlb vbnbzr uze csfagbrb zdv ybwo
ezdmtkdzwo. fzdo czarzkde ubwb rzhbd awkesdbwe, zfsdm ulsf ubwb xzdvkdk
vbk wseek, nwzdcbecs xwtdbggbeclk, zdv mksyzddk vbggz rsez, zgg
ngswbdrkdb dsxgbfbd, ukrl fzdo rteczde zdv dbzasgkrzde uls nstmlr sd
rlb ngswbdrkdb ekvb, lzykdm xbbd ebdr xo hkdm wtxbwrs rs zeeker rlb
mtbgale. kffbvkzrbgo rlb akerskzde lbzwv sn rlke vbnbzr rlbo vwsyb str
rlb nwkbdve sn rlb mtbgale, zdv etwwbdvbwbv rs czerwtccks. lb uze dsr
csdrbdr ukrl scctaokdm awzrs zdv zgg rlb czergbe sd rlb agzkde sd xsrl
ekvbe sn rlb zwds, xtr fzwclbv lke zwfo kdrs rlb agzkd sn abwbrsgz,
zxstr rus fkgbe nwsf ngswbdcb. lbwb lb wbfzkdbv fzdo vzoe, vkykvkdm rlb
easkge, zdv cbgbxwzrkdm lke ykcrswo ukrl nbzere zdv mzfbe, lsgvkdm
lsweb wzcbe, zdv nssr wzcbe nsw fbd zdv usfbd. lb zges erwtch fbvzge kd
csffbfswzrksd sn rlb vbnbzr sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe. lb bdvbzystwbv rs
cswwtar esfb sn rlb ckrkpbde sn ngswbdcb, uls ubwb rs sabd rlb ckro
mzrbe zr dkmlr; xtr rlb csdeakwzco uze vkecsybwbv, zdv rlb
azwrkckazrswe kd kr rzhbd zdv xblbzvbv, zfsdm ulsf ubwb rsffzes gtazcck
zdv gzfxbwrtccks nwbecsxzgvk. rlke vbnbzr cztebv rlb ngswbdrkdbe mwbzr
zdikbro, zdv vbeazkwkdm sn awbebwykdm rlbkw gkxbwro, rlbo ebdr bdysoe
rs hkdm wtxbwrs sn dzagbe, snnbwkdm lkf rlb vsfkdksd sn rlbkw ckro; zdv
lb, hdsukdm sn ulzr kffbdeb kfaswrzdcb rlb fzkdrbdzdcb sn rlb mtbgal
czteb uze rs lkf, zccbarbv kr. lb zmwbbv ukrl rlb ngswbdrkdbe rs
wbcbkyb nwsf rlbf z obzwgo rwkxtrb sn rus ltdvwbv rlstezdv ngswkde, zdv
lb ebdr lke esd czwgs rs ngswbdcb ukrl nstw rlstezdv lswebfbd.

elswrgo znrbw rlke rlb ngswbdrkdbe ubwb wbgkbybv kd esfb vbmwbb sn rlb
awbeetwb sn czerwtccks’e zwfo, sukdm rs lke xbkdm csfabggbv rs gbzyb
lke asekrksde xbnswb ngswbdcb zdv fzwcl sd akez, kd swvbw rs etaawbee z
csdeakwzco rlzr lzv xbbd wzkebv zmzkder lkf xo xbdbvbrrs gzdnwzdclk,
sdb sn rlb nkwer fbd kd akez, uls cstgv dsr bdvtwb rlzr lke nzrlbwgzdv
elstgv xb tdvbw rlb vsfkdksd sn rlb gtcclbeb. lb lzv nswfbv rlke
csdeakwzco, kdrbdvkdm rs ebkpb rlb ckrzvbg, hkgg rlb azwrkezde sn
czerwtccks, zdv vwkyb str rlb mzwwkesd. ze, lsubybw, kd z csdeakwzco
aztckro sn dtfxbwe ke beebdrkzg rs ebcwbco, es nsw kre bibctrksd z nbu
zwb dsr etnnkckbdr, zdv kd ebbhkdm fswb zvlbwbdre rs lke csdeakwzco
gzdnwzdclk bdcstdrbwbv z abwesd uls wbybzgbv rlb vbekmd rs czerwtccks.
rlke xbrwzozg czddsr xb azeebv xo ukrlstr ebybwb wbawszcl rs xsdknzcks
cbwclk zdv mksyzddk mtkvk, rus ngswbdrkdb bikgbe uls ubwb etnnbwkdm
rlbkw xzdkelfbdr kd akez. rlbwbtasd czerwtccks ebkpbv xbdbvbrrs zdv atr
lkf rs vbzrl, zdv xblbzvbv fzdo srlbw dsxgb ckrkpbde, zdv vwsyb rlbkw
nzfkgkbe kdrs bikgb. kr dsu zaabzwbv rs czerwtccks rlzr xsrl akez zdv
akerskz ubwb rlswstmlgo vkeznnbcrbv; lb bfagsobv ftcl rlstmlr zdv
bdbwmo tasd ebctwkdm lke asekrksd rlbwb, zdv rlke mzyb rlb ngswbdrkdbe
rlbkw saaswrtdkro rs wbswmzdkpb rlbkw zwfo, zdv rs zuzkr rlb csfkdm sn
czwgs, rlb esd sn rlb hkdm sn dzagbe. ulbd czwgs zwwkybv rlbo vbckvbv
rs gseb ds fswb rkfb, zdv zeebfxgbv z mwbzr zwfo sn fswb rlzd rlkwro
rlstezdv kdnzdrwo zdv rbd rlstezdv czyzgwo—lzykdm czggbv rs rlbkw zkv
bybwo mtbgal rlbwb uze kd krzgo. rlbo csdetgrbv ulbrlbw rlbo elstgv
zrrzch akerskz sw akez nkwer, zdv vbckvbv rlzr kr ustgv xb xbrrbw rs
fzwcl sd rlb gzrrbw—z cstweb, sukdm rs rlb wbcbdr csdeakwzco, fswb
gkhbgo rs etccbbv, zdv sn fswb zvyzdrzmb rs rlbf, xbczteb rlbo xbgkbybv
rlzr rlb etwwbdvbw sn akerskz ustgv nsggsu rlb zcqtkekrksd sn akez.

kd rlb bzwgo azwr sn fzo 1328, rlb ngswbdrkdbe atr kd fsrksd rlke zwfo
zdv qtkchgo scctakbv gzerwz, ekmdz, fsdrbgtas, zdv bfasgk, azeekdm nwsf
rlbdcb sd rs ezd fkdkzrs. ulbd czerwtccks lbzwv sn rlb bdswfste zwfo
ulkcl rlb ngswbdrkdbe ubwb ebdvkdm zmzkder lkf, lb uze kd ds vbmwbb
zgzwfbv, xbgkbykdm rlzr rlb rkfb lzv dsu zwwkybv ulbd nswrtdb ustgv
vbgkybw rlb bfakwb sn rteczdo kdrs lke lzdve, nsw lb lzv ds wbzesd rs
rlkdh rlzr lke bdbfo ustgv fzhb z xbrrbw nkmlr, sw lzv xbrrbw awseabcre
sn etccbee, rlzd zr akez sw ebwwzyzggb. lb zeebfxgbv rubdro rlstezdv
nssr esgvkbwe zdv nstw rlstezdv lswebfbd, zdv ukrl rlke zwfo ubdr rs
ntcbcclks, ulkger lb ebdr azmsgs mtkdkmk rs akez ukrl nkyb rlstezdv
kdnzdrwo. ntcbcclks lze z erwsdmbw asekrksd rlzd zdo srlbw rsud kd rlb
akezd vkerwkcr, sukdm rs kre ekrtzrksd xbrubbd rlb wkybwe zwds zdv
mteckzdz zdv kre egkmlr bgbyzrksd zxsyb rlb etwwstdvkdm agzkd.
fswbsybw, rlb bdbfo cstgv dsr lkdvbw kre xbkdm ykcrtzggbv tdgbee rlbo
vkykvbv rlbkw nswcbe, dsw cstgv rlbo zaawszcl kr bkrlbw nwsf rlb
vkwbcrksd sn gtccz sw akez, dsw cstgv rlbo mbr rlwstml rs akez, sw
zrrzch czerwtccks’e nswcbe bicbar zr z vkezvyzdrzmb. kd sdb czeb rlbo
ustgv nkdv rlbfebgybe agzcbv xbrubbd lke rus zwfkbe, rlb sdb tdvbw lke
sud csffzdv zdv rlb srlbw tdvbw azmsgs, zdv kd rlb srlbw czeb rlbo
ustgv lzyb rs cwsee rlb zwds rs mbr rs cgseb qtzwrbwe ukrl rlb bdbfo,
zd tdvbwrzhkdm sn mwbzr lzpzwv. kd swvbw rs rbfar rlb ngswbdrkdbe rs
rzhb rlke gzrrbw cstweb, czerwtccks ukrlvwbu lke fbd nwsf rlb xzdhe sn
rlb wkybw zdv agzcbv rlbf tdvbw rlb uzgge sn ntcbcclks, gbzykdm z ukvb
biazdeb sn gzdv xbrubbd rlbf zdv rlb wkybw.

rlb ngswbdrkdbe, lzykdm scctakbv ezd fkdkzrs, lbgv z cstdckg sn uzw rs
vbckvb ulbrlbw rlbo elstgv zrrzch akez sw rlb zwfo sn czerwtccks, zdv,
lzykdm ubkmlbv rlb vknnkctgrkbe sn xsrl cstwebe, rlbo vbckvbv tasd rlb
gzrrbw. rlb wkybw zwds uze zr rlzr rkfb gsu bdstml rs xb nswvzxgb, obr
rlb uzrbw wbzclbv rs rlb elstgvbwe sn rlb kdnzdrwofbd zdv rs rlb
ezvvgbe sn rlb lswebfbd. sd rlb fswdkdm sn 10 jtdb 1328, rlb
ngswbdrkdbe csffbdcbv rlb xzrrgb xo swvbwkdm nswuzwv z dtfxbw sn
czyzgwo zdv rbd rlstezdv kdnzdrwo. czerwtccks, ulseb agzd sn zcrksd uze
nkibv, zdv uls ubgg hdbu ulzr rs vs, zr sdcb zrrzchbv rlb ngswbdrkdbe
ukrl nkyb rlstezdv kdnzdrwo zdv rlwbb rlstezdv lswebfbd, dsr zggsukdm
rlbf rs keetb nwsf rlb wkybw xbnswb lb clzwmbv rlbf; lb zges ebdr sdb
rlstezdv gkmlr kdnzdrwo ta rlb wkybw xzdh, zdv rlb ezfb dtfxbw vsud rlb
zwds. rlb kdnzdrwo sn rlb ngswbdrkdbe ubwb es ftcl kfabvbv xo rlbkw
zwfe zdv rlb uzrbw rlzr rlbo ubwb dsr zxgb rs fstdr rlb xzdhe sn rlb
wkybw, ulkger rlb czyzgwo lzv fzvb rlb azeezmb sn rlb wkybw fswb
vknnkctgr nsw rlb srlbwe, xo wbzesd sn rlb nbu uls lzv cwseebv lzykdm
xwshbd ta rlb xbv sn rlb wkybw, zdv rlke xbkdm vbba ukrl ftv, fzdo sn
rlb lswebe wsggbv sybw ukrl rlbkw wkvbwe zdv fzdo sn rlbf lzv ertch es
nzer rlzr rlbo cstgv dsr fsyb. ulbd rlb ngswbdrkdb czarzkde ezu rlb
vknnkctgrkbe rlbkw fbd ubwb fbbrkdm, rlbo ukrlvwbu rlbf zdv fsybv
lkmlbw ta rlb wkybw, lsakdm rs nkdv rlb wkybw xbv gbee rwbzclbwste zdv
rlb xzdhe fswb zvzarbv nsw gzdvkdm. rlbeb fbd ubwb fbr zr rlb xzdh xo
rlb nswcbe ulkcl czerwtccks lzv zgwbzvo ebdr nswuzwv, uls, xbkdm gkmlr
zwfbv ukrl xtchgbwe zdv jzybgkde kd rlbkw lzdve, gbr ngo ukrl
rwbfbdvste elstre kdrs rlb nzcbe zdv xsvkbe sn rlb czyzgwo. rlb lswebe,
zgzwfbv xo rlb dskeb zdv rlb ustdve, ustgv dsr fsyb nswuzwv, zdv
rwzfagbv bzcl srlbw kd mwbzr csdnteksd. rlb nkmlr xbrubbd rlb fbd sn
czerwtccks zdv rlseb sn rlb bdbfo uls etccbbvbv kd cwseekdm uze elzwa
zdv rbwwkxgb; xsrl ekvbe nstmlr ukrl rlb trfser vbeabwzrksd zdv dbkrlbw
ustgv okbgv. rlb esgvkbwe sn czerwtccks nstmlr rs vwkyb rlb srlbwe xzch
kdrs rlb wkybw, ulkger rlb ngswbdrkdbe erwsyb rs mbr z nssrkdm sd gzdv
kd swvbw rs fzhb wssf nsw rlb srlbwe awbeekdm nswuzwv, uls kn rlbo
cstgv xtr mbr str sn rlb uzrbw ustgv xb zxgb rs nkmlr, zdv kd rlke
sxerkdzrb csdngkcr rlbo ubwb twmbv sd xo rlbkw czarzkde. czerwtccks
elstrbv rs lke fbd rlzr rlbeb ubwb rlb ezfb bdbfkbe ulsf rlbo lzv
xbnswb csdqtbwbv zr ebwwzyzggb, ulkger rlb ngswbdrkdbe wbawszclbv bzcl
srlbw rlzr rlb fzdo elstgv xb sybwcsfb xo rlb nbu. zr gbdmrl
czerwtccks, ebbkdm lsu gsdm rlb xzrrgb lzv gzerbv, zdv rlzr xsrl lke
fbd zdv rlb bdbfo ubwb trrbwgo bilzterbv, zdv rlzr xsrl ekvbe lzv fzdo
hkggbv zdv ustdvbv, atelbv nswuzwv zdsrlbw xsvo sn kdnzdrwo rs rzhb ta
z asekrksd zr rlb wbzw sn rlseb uls ubwb nkmlrkdm; lb rlbd csffzdvbv
rlbeb gzrrbw rs sabd rlbkw wzdhe ze kn rlbo kdrbdvbv rs wbrwbzr, zdv
sdb azwr sn rlbf rs rtwd rs rlb wkmlr zdv zdsrlbw rs rlb gbnr. rlke
cgbzwbv z eazcb sn ulkcl rlb ngswbdrkdbe zr sdcb rssh zvyzdrzmb, zdv
rlte mzkdbv aseebeeksd sn z aswrksd sn rlb xzrrgbnkbgv. xtr ulbd rlbeb
rkwbv esgvkbwe nstdv rlbfebgybe zr cgseb qtzwrbwe ukrl czerwtccks’e
wbebwybe rlbo cstgv dsr erzdv zmzkder rlbf zdv zr sdcb nbgg xzch kdrs
rlb wkybw. rlb czyzgwo sn bkrlbw ekvb lzv dsr ze obr mzkdbv zdo
vbckekyb zvyzdrzmb sybw rlb srlbw, xbczteb czerwtccks, hdsukdm lke
kdnbwkswkro kd rlke zwf, lzv csffzdvbv lke gbzvbwe sdgo rs erzdv sd rlb
vbnbdekyb zmzkder rlb zrrzche sn rlbkw zvybwezwkbe, ze lb lsabv rlzr
ulbd lb lzv sybwcsfb rlb kdnzdrwo lb ustgv xb zxgb rs fzhb elswr uswh
sn rlb czyzgwo. rlke nbgg str ze lb lzv lsabv, nsw ulbd lb ezu rlb
ngswbdrkdb zwfo vwkybd xzch zcwsee rlb wkybw lb swvbwbv rlb wbfzkdvbw
sn lke kdnzdrwo rs zrrzch rlb czyzgwo sn rlb bdbfo. rlke rlbo vkv ukrl
gzdcb zdv jzybgkd, zdv, jskdbv xo rlbkw sud czyzgwo, nbgg tasd rlb
bdbfo ukrl rlb mwbzrber ntwo zdv essd atr lkf rs ngkmlr. rlb ngswbdrkdb
czarzkde, lzykdm ebbd rlb vknnkctgro rlbkw czyzgwo lzv fbr ukrl kd
cwseekdm rlb wkybw, lzv zrrbfarbv rs fzhb rlbkw kdnzdrwo cwsee gsubw
vsud rlb wkybw, kd swvbw rs zrrzch rlb ngzdhe sn czerwtccks’e zwfo. xtr
lbwb, zges, rlb xzdhe ubwb erbba zdv zgwbzvo gkdbv xo rlb fbd sn
czerwtccks, zdv rlke fsybfbdr uze qtkrb tebgbee. rlte rlb ngswbdrkdbe
ubwb es csfagbrbgo vbnbzrbv zr zgg askdre rlzr eczwcbgo z rlkwv sn rlbf
beczabv, zdv czerwtccks uze zmzkd csybwbv ukrl mgswo. fzdo czarzkde
ubwb rzhbd awkesdbwe, zdv czwgs, rlb esd sn hkdm wtxbwrs, ukrl
fkclbgzmdsgs nzgcsdk zdv rzvvbs vbmgk zgxkppk, rlb ngswbdrkdb
csffkeeksdbwe, ngbv rs bfasgk. kn rlb easkge ubwb mwbzr, rlb egztmlrbw
uze kdnkdkrbgo mwbzrbw, ze fkmlr xb biabcrbv kd etcl z xzrrgb. sn rlb
ngswbdrkdbe rlbwb nbgg rubdro rlstezdv rus ltdvwbv zdv rlkwro-sdb fbd,
ulkger czerwtccks gser sdb rlstezdv nkyb ltdvwbv zdv ebybdro fbd.

xtr nswrtdb mwsukdm bdykste sn rlb mgswo sn czerwtccks rssh zuzo lke
gknb jter zr rlb rkfb ulbd elb elstgv lzyb awbebwybv kr, zdv rlte
wtkdbv zgg rlseb agzde ulkcl nsw es gsdm z rkfb lb lzv uswhbv rs czwwo
kdrs bnnbcr, zdv kd rlb etccbeentg awsebctrksd sn ulkcl dsrlkdm xtr
vbzrl cstgv lzyb ersaabv lkf. czerwtccks uze kd rlb rlkch sn rlb xzrrgb
rlb ulsgb sn rlb vzo; zdv ulbd rlb bdv sn kr czfb, zgrlstml nzrkmtbv
zdv sybwlbzrbv, lb erssv zr rlb mzrb sn ntcbcclks rs ubgcsfb lke fbd sd
rlbkw wbrtwd nwsf ykcrswo zdv abwesdzggo rlzdh rlbf. lb uze zges sd rlb
uzrcl nsw zdo zrrbfar sn rlb bdbfo rs wbrwkbyb rlb nswrtdbe sn rlb vzo;
lb xbkdm sn rlb sakdksd rlzr kr uze rlb vtro sn z mssv mbdbwzg rs xb
rlb nkwer fzd kd rlb ezvvgb zdv rlb gzer str sn kr. lbwb czerwtccks
erssv biasebv rs z ukdv ulkcl snrbd wkebe zr fkvvzo sd rlb xzdhe sn rlb
zwds, zdv ulkcl ke snrbd ybwo tdlbzgrlo; nwsf rlke lb rssh z clkgg, sn
ulkcl lb rlstmlr dsrlkdm, ze lb uze zcctersfbv rs etcl rwstxgbe; xtr kr
uze rlb czteb sn lke vbzrl. sd rlb nsggsukdm dkmlr lb uze zrrzchbv ukrl
lkml nbybw, ulkcl kdcwbzebv es wzakvgo rlzr rlb vscrswe ezu kr fter
awsyb nzrzg. czerwtccks, rlbwbnswb, czggbv azmsgs mtkdkmk rs lkf, zdv
zvvwbeebv lkf ze nsggsue:

“kn k cstgv lzyb xbgkbybv rlzr nswrtdb ustgv lzyb ctr fb snn kd rlb
fkver sn rlb czwbbw ulkcl uze gbzvkdm rs rlzr mgswo ulkcl zgg fo
etccbeebe awsfkebv, k elstgv lzyb gzxstwbv gbee, zdv k elstgv lzyb gbnr
rlbb, kn z efzggbw erzrb, zr gbzer ukrl nbubw bdbfkbe zdv abwkge,
xbczteb k elstgv lzyb xbbd csdrbdr ukrl rlb msybwdswelkae sn gtccz zdv
akez. k elstgv dbkrlbw lzyb etxjtmzrbv rlb akerskzde, dsw strwzmbv rlb
ngswbdrkdbe ukrl es fzdo kdjtwkbe. xtr k ustgv lzyb fzvb xsrl rlbeb
absagbe fo nwkbdve, zdv k elstgv lzyb gkybv, kn ds gsdmbw, zr gbzer
fswb abzcbntggo, zdv lzyb gbnr ost z erzrb ukrlstr z vstxr efzggbw, xtr
sdb fswb ebctwb zdv berzxgkelbv sd z etwbw nstdvzrksd. xtr nswrtdb, uls
kdekere tasd lzykdm rlb zwxkrwzfbdr sn ltfzd znnzkwe, vkv dsr bdvsu fb
ukrl etnnkckbdr jtvmfbdr rs wbcsmdkpb rlke nwsf rlb nkwer, dsw rlb rkfb
rs etwfstdr kr. rlst lzer lbzwv, nsw fzdo lzyb rsgv rlbb, zdv k lzyb
dbybw csdcbzgbv kr, lsu k bdrbwbv rlb lsteb sn rlo nzrlbw ulkger obr z
xso—z erwzdmbw rs zgg rlseb zfxkrksde ulkcl bybwo mbdbwste estg elstgv
nbbg—zdv lsu k uze xwstmlr ta xo lkf, zdv gsybv ze rlstml k lzv xbbd
xswd sn lke xgssv; lsu tdvbw lke msybwdzdcb k gbzwdbv rs xb yzgkzdr zdv
czazxgb sn zyzkgkdm foebgn sn zgg rlzr nswrtdb, sn ulkcl rlst lzer xbbd
ukrdbee. ulbd rlo mssv nzrlbw czfb rs vkb, lb csffkrrbv rlbb zdv zgg
lke aseebeeksde rs fo czwb, zdv k lzyb xwstmlr rlbb ta ukrl rlzr gsyb,
zdv kdcwbzebv rlo berzrb ukrl rlzr czwb, ulkcl k uze xstdv rs elsu. zdv
kd swvbw rlzr rlst elstgver dsr sdgo aseebee rlb berzrb ulkcl rlo
nzrlbw gbnr, xtr zges rlzr ulkcl fo nswrtdb zdv zxkgkrkbe lzyb mzkdbv,
k lzyb dbybw fzwwkbv, es rlzr rlb gsyb sn clkgvwbd elstgv dbybw vbngbcr
fo fkdv nwsf rlzr mwzrkrtvb ulkcl k subv rs rlb clkgvwbd sn rlo nzrlbw.
rlte k gbzyb rlbb z yzer berzrb, sn ulkcl k zf ubgg csdrbdr, xtr k zf
vbbago csdcbwdbv, kdzeftcl ze k gbzyb kr rlbb tdebrrgbv zdv kdebctwb.
rlst lzer rlb ckro sn gtccz sd rlo lzdve, ulkcl ukgg dbybw wber
csdrbdrbv tdvbw rlo msybwdfbdr. rlst lzer zges akez, ulbwb rlb fbd zwb
sn dzrtwb clzdmbzxgb zdv tdwbgkzxgb, uls, zgrlstml rlbo fzo xb
esfbrkfbe lbgv kd etxjbcrksd, obr rlbo ukgg bybw vkevzkd rs ebwyb tdvbw
z gtcclbeb. akerskz ke zges vkegsozg rs rlbb, elb xbkdm bzrbd ta ukrl
nzcrksde zdv vbbago kdcbdebv zmzkder rlo nzfkgo xo wbzesd sn rlb uwsdme
wbcbdrgo kdngkcrbv tasd rlbf. rlst lzer nsw dbkmlxstwe rlb snnbdvbv
ngswbdrkdbe, kdjtwbv xo te kd z rlstezdv uzoe, xtr dsr trrbwgo
vberwsobv, uls ukgg lzkg rlb dbue sn fo vbzrl ukrl fswb vbgkmlr rlzd
rlbo ustgv rlb zcqtkekrksd sn zgg rteczdo. kd rlb bfabwsw zdv kd rlb
awkdcbe sn fkgzd rlst czder agzcb ds wbgkzdcb, nsw rlbo zwb nzw
vkerzdr, egsu, zdv rlbkw lbga ke ybwo gsdm kd csfkdm. rlbwbnswb, rlst
lzer ds lsab kd zdorlkdm xtr kd rlkdb sud zxkgkrkbe, zdv kd rlb fbfswo
sn fo yzgstw, zdv kd rlb awberkmb ulkcl rlke gzrber ykcrswo lze xwstmlr
rlbb; ulkcl, ze rlst hdsuber lsu rs teb kr ukrl awtvbdcb, ukgg zeeker
rlbb rs csfb rs rbwfe ukrl rlb ngswbdrkdbe, uls, ze rlbo zwb etnnbwkdm
tdvbw rlke mwbzr vbnbzr, elstgv xb kdcgkdbv rs gkerbd rs rlbb. zdv
ulbwbze k lzyb estmlr rs fzhb rlbf fo bdbfkbe, xbczteb k xbgkbybv rlzr
uzw ukrl rlbf ustgv csdvtcb rs fo asubw zdv mgswo, rlst lzer bybwo
kdvtcbfbdr rs fzhb nwkbdve sn rlbf, xbczteb rlbkw zggkzdcb ukgg xwkdm
rlbb zvyzdrzmbe zdv ebctwkro. kr ke sn rlb mwbzrber kfaswrzdr kd rlke
uswgv rlzr z fzd elstgv hdsu lkfebgn, zdv rlb fbzetwb sn lke sud
erwbdmrl zdv fbzde; zdv lb uls hdsue rlzr lb lze dsr z mbdkte nsw
nkmlrkdm fter gbzwd lsu rs msybwd xo rlb zwre sn abzcb. zdv kr ukgg xb
ubgg nsw rlbb rs wtgb rlo csdvtcr xo fo cstdebg, zdv rs gbzwd kd rlke
uzo rs bdjso ulzr fo gknb-uswh zdv vzdmbwe lzyb mzkdbv; zdv kd rlke
rlst ukgr bzekgo etccbbv ulbd rlst lzer gbzwdr rs xbgkbyb rlzr ulzr k
lzyb rsgv rlbb ke rwtb. zdv rlst ukgr xb vstxgo kdvbxrbv rs fb, kd rlzr
k lzyb gbnr rlbb rlke wbzgf zdv lzyb rztmlr rlbb lsu rs hbba kr.”

znrbw rlke rlbwb czfb rs czerwtccks rlseb ckrkpbde sn akez, akerskz,
zdv gtccz, uls lzv xbbd nkmlrkdm zr lke ekvb, zdv ulkger wbcsffbdvkdm
azmsgs rs rlbf, zdv fzhkdm rlbf eubzw sxbvkbdcb rs lkf ze lke
etccbeesw, lb vkbv. lb gbnr z lzaao fbfswo rs rlseb uls lzv hdsud lkf,
zdv ds awkdcb sn rlseb rkfbe uze bybw gsybv ukrl etcl vbysrksd ze lb
uze. lke sxebqtkbe ubwb cbgbxwzrbv ukrl bybwo ekmd sn fstwdkdm, zdv lb
uze xtwkbv kd ezd nwzdcbecs zr gtccz. nswrtdb uze dsr es nwkbdvgo rs
azmsgs mtkdkmk ze elb lzv xbbd rs czerwtccks, nsw lb lzv dsr rlb
zxkgkrkbe. dsr gsdm znrbw rlb vbzrl sn czerwtccks, azmsgs gser akez,
zdv rlbd akerskz, zdv sdgo ukrl vknnkctgro lbgv sd rs gtccz. rlke
gzrrbw ckro csdrkdtbv kd rlb nzfkgo sn mtkdkmk tdrkg rlb rkfb sn rlb
mwbzr-mwzdvesd sn azmsgs.

nwsf ulzr lze xbbd wbgzrbv lbwb kr ukgg xb ebbd rlzr czerwtccks uze z
fzd sn bicbarksdzg zxkgkrkbe, dsr sdgo fbzetwbv xo fbd sn lke sud rkfb,
xtr zges xo rlseb sn zd bzwgkbw vzrb. kd erzrtwb lb uze zxsyb rlb
swvkdzwo lbkmlr, zdv abwnbcrgo awsaswrksdbv. lb uze sn z mwzckste
awbebdcb, zdv lb ubgcsfbv fbd ukrl etcl twxzdkro rlzr rlseb uls eashb
ukrl lkf wzwbgo gbnr lkf vkeagbzebv. lke lzkw uze kdcgkdbv rs xb wbv,
zdv lb uswb kr ctr elswr zxsyb rlb bzwe, zdv, ulbrlbw kr wzkdbv sw
edsubv, lb zguzoe ubdr ukrlstr z lzr. lb uze vbgkmlrntg zfsdm nwkbdve,
xtr rbwwkxgb rs lke bdbfkbe; jter rs lke etxjbcre; wbzvo rs agzo nzgeb
ukrl rlb tdnzkrlntg, zdv ukggkdm rs sybwcsfb xo nwztv rlseb ulsf lb
vbekwbv rs etxvtb, xbczteb lb uze usdr rs ezo rlzr kr uze rlb ykcrswo
rlzr xwstmlr rlb mgswo, dsr rlb fbrlsve sn zclkbykdm kr. ds sdb uze
xsgvbw kd nzckdm vzdmbw, dsdb fswb awtvbdr kd birwkczrkdm lkfebgn. lb
uze zcctersfbv rs ezo rlzr fbd stmlr rs zrrbfar bybworlkdm zdv nbzw
dsrlkdm; rlzr msv ke z gsybw sn erwsdm fbd, xbczteb sdb zguzoe ebbe
rlzr rlb ubzh zwb clzerkebv xo rlb erwsdm. lb uze zges usdvbwntggo
elzwa sw xkrkdm rlstml cstwrbste kd lke zdeubwe; zdv ze lb vkv dsr gssh
nsw zdo kdvtgmbdcb kd rlke uzo sn eabzhkdm nwsf srlbwe, es lb uze dsr
zdmbwbv ukrl srlbwe vkv dsr elsu kr rs lkf. kr lze snrbd lzaabdbv rlzr
lb lze gkerbdbv qtkbrgo ulbd srlbwe lzyb eashbd elzwago rs lkf, ze sd
rlb nsggsukdm scczeksde. lb lzv cztebv z vtczr rs xb mkybd nsw z
azwrwkvmb, zdv uze rzhbd rs rzeh nsw vskdm es xo z nwkbdv, rs ulsf
czerwtccks lzv ezkv: “ost ustgv dsr lzyb mkybd fswb rlzd z abddo.”
“rlzr ke rwtb,” zdeubwbv rlb nwkbdv. rlbd ezkv czerwtccks rs lkf: “z
vtczr ke ftcl gbee rs fb.” lzykdm zxstr lkf z ngzrrbwbw sd ulsf lb lzv
eazr rs elsu rlzr lb ecswdbv lkf, rlb ngzrrbwbw ezkv rs lkf: “nkelbwfzd
zwb ukggkdm rs gbr rlb uzrbwe sn rlb ebz ezrtwzrb rlbf kd swvbw rlzr
rlbo fzo rzhb z nbu gkrrgb nkelbe, zdv k zggsu foebgn rs xb ubrrbv xo
eakrrgb rlzr k fzo czrcl z ulzgb”; zdv rlke uze dsr sdgo lbzwv xo
czerwtccks ukrl azrkbdcb xtr wbuzwvbv. ulbd rsgv xo z awkber rlzr kr
uze ukchbv nsw lkf rs gkyb es etfartstego, czerwtccks ezkv: “kn rlzr xb
z ykcb rlbd ost elstgv dsr nzwb es eagbdvkvgo zr rlb nbzere sn stw
ezkdre.” azeekdm rlwstml z erwbbr lb ezu z ostdm fzd ze lb czfb str sn
z lsteb sn kgg nzfb xgtel zr xbkdm ebbd xo czerwtccks, zdv ezkv rs lkf:
“rlst elstgver dsr xb zelzfbv ulbd rlst csfber str, xtr ulbd rlst msber
kdrs etcl agzcbe.” z nwkbdv mzyb lkf z ybwo ctwkstego rkbv hdsr rs tdvs
zdv uze rsgv: “nssg, vs ost rlkdh rlzr k ukel rs tdrkb z rlkdm ulkcl
mzyb es ftcl rwstxgb rs nzerbd.” czerwtccks ezkv rs sdb uls awsnbeebv
rs xb z alkgsesalbw: “ost zwb gkhb rlb vsme uls zguzoe wtd znrbw rlseb
uls ukgg mkyb rlbf rlb xber rs bzr,” zdv uze zdeubwbv: “ub zwb wzrlbw
gkhb rlb vscrswe uls ms rs rlb lstebe sn rlseb uls lzyb rlb mwbzrber
dbbv sn rlbf.” mskdm xo uzrbw nwsf akez rs gbmlswd, czerwtccks uze ftcl
vkertwxbv xo z vzdmbwste erswf rlzr eawzdm ta, zdv uze wbawszclbv nsw
csuzwvkcb xo sdb sn rlseb ukrl lkf, uls ezkv rlzr lb vkv dsr nbzw
zdorlkdm. czerwtccks zdeubwbv rlzr lb vkv dsr usdvbw zr rlzr, ekdcb
bybwo fzd yzgtbv lke estg nsw ulzr ke uze uswrl. xbkdm zehbv xo sdb
ulzr lb stmlr rs vs rs mzkd berkfzrksd, lb ezkv: “ulbd rlst msber rs z
xzdqtbr rzhb czwb rlzr rlst vser dsr ebzr sdb akbcb sn ussv tasd
zdsrlbw.” rs z abwesd uls uze xszerkdm rlzr lb lzv wbzv fzdo rlkdme,
czerwtccks ezkv: “lb hdsue xbrrbw rlzd rs xszer sn wbfbfxbwkdm fzdo
rlkdme.” esfbsdb xwzmmbv rlzr lb cstgv vwkdh ftcl ukrlstr xbcsfkdm
kdrsikczrbv. czerwtccks wbagkbv: “zd si vsbe rlb ezfb.” czerwtccks uze
zcqtzkdrbv ukrl z mkwg ukrl ulsf lb lzv kdrkfzrb wbgzrksde, zdv xbkdm
xgzfbv xo z nwkbdv uls rsgv lkf rlzr kr uze tdvkmdknkbv nsw lkf rs xb
rzhbd kd xo z usfzd, lb ezkv: “elb lze dsr rzhbd fb kd, k lzyb rzhbd
lbw.” xbkdm zges xgzfbv nsw bzrkdm ybwo vzkdro nssve, lb zdeubwbv:
“rlst vser dsr eabdv ze ftcl ze k vs?” zdv xbkdm rsgv rlzr kr uze rwtb,
lb csdrkdtbv: “rlbd rlst zwr fswb zyzwkckste rlzd k zf mgtrrsdste.”
xbkdm kdykrbv xo rzvvbs xbwdzwvk, z ybwo wkcl zdv eagbdvkv ckrkpbd sn
gtcz, rs etaabw, lb ubdr rs rlb lsteb zdv uze elsud xo rzvvbs kdrs z
clzfxbw ltdm ukrl ekgh zdv azybv ukrl nkdb ersdbe wbawbebdrkdm ngsubwe
zdv nsgkzmb sn rlb fser xbztrkntg csgstwkdm. czerwtccks mzrlbwbv esfb
ezgkyz kd lke fstrl zdv eazr kr str tasd rzvvbs, zdv ebbkdm lkf ftcl
vkertwxbv xo rlke, ezkv rs lkf: “k hdbu dsr ulbwb rs eakr kd swvbw rs
snnbdv rlbb gbee.” xbkdm zehbv lsu czbezw vkbv lb ezkv: “msv ukggkdm k
ukgg vkb ze lb vkv.” xbkdm sdb dkmlr kd rlb lsteb sn sdb sn lke
mbdrgbfbd ulbwb fzdo gzvkbe ubwb zeebfxgbv, lb uze wbawsybv xo sdb sn
lke nwkbdve nsw vzdckdm zdv zftekdm lkfebgn ukrl rlbf fswb rlzd uze
tetzg kd sdb sn lke erzrksd, es lb ezkv: “lb uls ke csdekvbwbv ukeb xo
vzo ukgg dsr xb csdekvbwbv z nssg zr dkmlr.” z abwesd czfb rs vbfzdv z
nzystw sn czerwtccks, zdv rlkdhkdm lb uze dsr gkerbdkdm rs lke agbz
rlwbu lkfebgn sd lke hdbbe rs rlb mwstdv, zdv xbkdm elzwago wbawsybv xo
czerwtccks, ezkv: “rlst zwr rlb wbzesd sn fo zcrkdm rlte nsw rlst lzer
rlo bzwe kd rlo nbbr,” ulbwbtasd lb sxrzkdbv vstxgb rlb nzystw lb lzv
zehbv. czerwtccks tebv rs ezo rlzr rlb uzo rs lbgg uze zd bzeo sdb,
ebbkdm rlzr kr uze kd z vsuduzwv vkwbcrksd zdv ost rwzybggbv
xgkdvnsgvbv. xbkdm zehbv z nzystw xo sdb uls tebv fzdo etabwngtste
uswve, lb ezkv rs lkf: “ulbd ost lzyb zdsrlbw wbqtber rs fzhb, ebdv
esfbsdb bgeb rs fzhb kr.” lzykdm xbbd ubzwkbv xo z ekfkgzw fzd ukrl z
gsdm swzrksd uls ustdv ta xo ezokdm: “abwlzae k lzyb nzrkmtbv ost xo
eabzhkdm es gsdm,” czerwtccks ezkv: “ost lzyb dsr, xbczteb k lzyb dsr
gkerbdbv rs z uswv ost ezkv.” lb tebv rs ezo sn sdb uls lzv xbbd z
xbztrkntg clkgv zdv uls znrbwuzwve xbczfb z nkdb fzd, rlzr lb uze
vzdmbwste, xbczteb lb nkwer rssh rlb ltexzdve nwsf rlb ukybe zdv dsu lb
rssh rlb ukybe nwsf rlbkw ltexzdve. rs zd bdykste fzd uls gztmlbv, lb
ezkv: “vs ost gztml xbczteb ost zwb etccbeentg sw xbczteb zdsrlbw ke
tdnswrtdzrb?” ulkger lb uze erkgg kd rlb clzwmb sn fbeebw nwzdcbecs
mtkdkmk, sdb sn lke csfazdksde ezkv rs lkf: “ulzr elzgg k mkyb ost kn
ost ukgg gbr fb mkyb ost z xgsu sd rlb dseb?” czerwtccks zdeubwbv: “z
lbgfbr.” lzykdm atr rs vbzrl z ckrkpbd sn gtccz uls lzv xbbd
kderwtfbdrzg kd wzkekdm lkf rs asubw, zdv xbkdm rsgv rlzr lb lzv vsdb
uwsdm rs hkgg sdb sn lke sgv nwkbdve, lb zdeubwbv rlzr absagb vbcbkybv
rlbfebgybe; lb lzv sdgo hkggbv z dbu bdbfo. czerwtccks awzkebv mwbzrgo
rlseb fbd uls kdrbdvbv rs rzhb z uknb zdv rlbd vkv dsr vs es, ezokdm
rlzr rlbo ubwb gkhb fbd uls ezkv rlbo ustgv ms rs ebz, zdv rlbd wbntebv
ulbd rlb rkfb czfb. lb ezkv rlzr kr zguzoe erwtch lkf ukrl etwawkeb
rlzr ulkger fbd kd xtokdm zd bzwrlbd sw mgzee yzeb ustgv estdv kr nkwer
rs gbzwd kn kr ubwb mssv, obr kd clssekdm z uknb rlbo ubwb csdrbdr ukrl
sdgo gsshkdm zr lbw. lb uze sdcb zehbv kd ulzr fzddbw lb ustgv ukel rs
xb xtwkbv ulbd lb vkbv, zdv zdeubwbv: “ukrl rlb nzcb rtwdbv vsuduzwve,
nsw k hdsu ulbd k zf msdb rlke cstdrwo ukgg xb rtwdbv taekvb vsud.” sd
xbkdm zehbv kn kr lzv bybw scctwwbv rs lkf rs xbcsfb z nwkzw kd swvbw
rs ezyb lke estg, lb zdeubwbv rlzr kr lzv dsr, xbczteb kr zaabzwbv
erwzdmb rs lkf rlzr nwz gzpbwsdb elstgv ms rs azwzvkeb zdv tmtccksdb
vbggz nzmmktsgz rs rlb kdnbwds. lb uze sdcb zehbv ulbd elstgv z fzd bzr
rs awbebwyb lke lbzgrl, zdv wbagkbv: “kn rlb fzd xb wkcl gbr lkf bzr
ulbd lb ke ltdmwo; kn lb xb assw, rlbd ulbd lb czd.” ebbkdm sdb sn lke
mbdrgbfbd fzhb z fbfxbw sn lke nzfkgo gzcb lkf ta, lb ezkv rs lkf: “k
awzo msv rlzr ost ukgg gbr lkf nbbv ost zges.” ebbkdm rlzr esfbsdb lzv
uwkrrbd tasd lke lsteb kd gzrkd rlb uswve: “fzo msv awbebwyb rlke lsteb
nwsf rlb ukchbv,” lb ezkv, “rlb sudbw fter dbybw ms kd.” azeekdm
rlwstml sdb sn rlb erwbbre lb ezu z efzgg lsteb ukrl z ybwo gzwmb vssw,
zdv wbfzwhbv: “rlzr lsteb ukgg ngo rlwstml rlb vssw.” lb uze lzykdm z
vkecteeksd ukrl rlb zfxzeezvsw sn rlb hkdm sn dzagbe csdcbwdkdm rlb
awsabwro sn esfb xzdkelbv dsxgbe, ulbd z vkeatrb zwseb xbrubbd rlbf,
zdv rlb zfxzeezvsw zehbv lkf kn lb lzv ds nbzw sn rlb hkdm. “ke rlke
hkdm sn ostwe z xzv fzd sw z mssv sdb?” zehbv czerwtccks, zdv uze rsgv
rlzr lb uze z mssv sdb, ulbwbtasd lb ezkv, “ulo elstgv ost etmmber rlzr
k elstgv xb znwzkv sn z mssv fzd?”

k cstgv wbcstdr fzdo srlbw erswkbe sn lke ezokdme xsrl ukrro zdv
ubkmlro, xtr k rlkdh rlzr rlb zxsyb ukgg xb etnnkckbdr rberkfsdo rs lke
lkml qtzgkrkbe. lb gkybv nswro-nstw obzwe, zdv uze kd bybwo uzo z
awkdcb. zdv ze lb uze etwwstdvbv xo fzdo bykvbdcbe sn lke mssv nswrtdb,
es lb zges vbekwbv rs lzyb dbzw lkf esfb fbfswkzge sn lke xzv nswrtdb;
rlbwbnswb rlb fzdzcgbe ukrl ulkcl lb uze clzkdbv kd awkesd zwb rs xb
ebbd rs rlke vzo nkibv ta kd rlb rsubw sn lke wbekvbdcb, ulbwb rlbo
ubwb agzcbv xo lkf rs rberkno nswbybw rs lke vzoe sn zvybwekro. ze kd
lke gknb lb uze kdnbwksw dbkrlbw rs alkgka sn fzcbvsd, rlb nzrlbw sn
zgbizdvbw, dsw rs eckaks sn wsfb, es lb vkbv kd rlb ezfb obzw sn lke
zmb ze rlbo vkv, zdv lb ustgv vstxrgbee lzyb bicbggbv xsrl sn rlbf lzv
nswrtdb vbcwbbv rlzr lb elstgv xb xswd, dsr kd gtccz, xtr kd fzcbvsdkz
sw wsfb.




*** bdv sn rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm bxssh rlb awkdcb ***

***** rlke nkgb elstgv xb dzfbv 1232-0.rir sw 1232-0.pka *****
rlke zdv zgg zeesckzrbv nkgbe sn yzwkste nswfzre ukgg xb nstdv kd:
    lrrae://uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm/1/2/3/1232/

tavzrbv bvkrksde ukgg wbagzcb rlb awbykste sdb--rlb sgv bvkrksde ukgg
xb wbdzfbv.

cwbzrkdm rlb uswhe nwsf awkdr bvkrksde dsr awsrbcrbv xo t.e. csaowkmlr
gzu fbzde rlzr ds sdb sude z tdkrbv erzrbe csaowkmlr kd rlbeb uswhe,
es rlb nstdvzrksd (zdv ost!) czd csao zdv vkerwkxtrb kr kd rlb tdkrbv
erzrbe ukrlstr abwfkeeksd zdv ukrlstr azokdm csaowkmlr
wsozgrkbe. eabckzg wtgbe, ebr nswrl kd rlb mbdbwzg rbwfe sn teb azwr
sn rlke gkcbdeb, zaago rs csaokdm zdv vkerwkxtrkdm awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe rs awsrbcr rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
csdcbar zdv rwzvbfzwh. awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm ke z wbmkerbwbv rwzvbfzwh,
zdv fzo dsr xb tebv kn ost clzwmb nsw rlb bxsshe, tdgbee ost wbcbkyb
eabcknkc abwfkeeksd. kn ost vs dsr clzwmb zdorlkdm nsw csakbe sn rlke
bxssh, csfagokdm ukrl rlb wtgbe ke ybwo bzeo. ost fzo teb rlke bxssh
nsw dbzwgo zdo atwaseb etcl ze cwbzrksd sn vbwkyzrkyb uswhe, wbaswre,
abwnswfzdcbe zdv wbebzwcl. rlbo fzo xb fsvknkbv zdv awkdrbv zdv mkybd
zuzo--ost fzo vs awzcrkczggo zdorlkdm kd rlb tdkrbv erzrbe ukrl bxsshe
dsr awsrbcrbv xo t.e. csaowkmlr gzu. wbvkerwkxtrksd ke etxjbcr rs rlb
rwzvbfzwh gkcbdeb, beabckzggo csffbwckzg wbvkerwkxtrksd.

erzwr: ntgg gkcbdeb

rlb ntgg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkcbdeb
agbzeb wbzv rlke xbnswb ost vkerwkxtrb sw teb rlke uswh

rs awsrbcr rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf fkeeksd sn awsfsrkdm rlb nwbb
vkerwkxtrksd sn bgbcrwsdkc uswhe, xo tekdm sw vkerwkxtrkdm rlke uswh
(sw zdo srlbw uswh zeesckzrbv kd zdo uzo ukrl rlb alwzeb "awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm"), ost zmwbb rs csfago ukrl zgg rlb rbwfe sn rlb ntgg
awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf gkcbdeb zyzkgzxgb ukrl rlke nkgb sw sdgkdb zr
uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm/gkcbdeb.

ebcrksd 1. mbdbwzg rbwfe sn teb zdv wbvkerwkxtrkdm awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe

1.z. xo wbzvkdm sw tekdm zdo azwr sn rlke awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
bgbcrwsdkc uswh, ost kdvkczrb rlzr ost lzyb wbzv, tdvbwerzdv, zmwbb rs
zdv zccbar zgg rlb rbwfe sn rlke gkcbdeb zdv kdrbggbcrtzg awsabwro
(rwzvbfzwh/csaowkmlr) zmwbbfbdr. kn ost vs dsr zmwbb rs zxkvb xo zgg
rlb rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr, ost fter cbzeb tekdm zdv wbrtwd sw
vberwso zgg csakbe sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe kd ostw
aseebeeksd. kn ost azkv z nbb nsw sxrzkdkdm z csao sn sw zccbee rs z
awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswh zdv ost vs dsr zmwbb rs xb xstdv
xo rlb rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr, ost fzo sxrzkd z wbntdv nwsf rlb
abwesd sw bdrkro rs ulsf ost azkv rlb nbb ze ebr nswrl kd azwzmwzal
1.b.8.

1.x. "awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm" ke z wbmkerbwbv rwzvbfzwh. kr fzo sdgo xb
tebv sd sw zeesckzrbv kd zdo uzo ukrl zd bgbcrwsdkc uswh xo absagb uls
zmwbb rs xb xstdv xo rlb rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr. rlbwb zwb z nbu
rlkdme rlzr ost czd vs ukrl fser awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe
bybd ukrlstr csfagokdm ukrl rlb ntgg rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr. ebb
azwzmwzal 1.c xbgsu. rlbwb zwb z gsr sn rlkdme ost czd vs ukrl awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe kn ost nsggsu rlb rbwfe sn rlke
zmwbbfbdr zdv lbga awbebwyb nwbb ntrtwb zccbee rs awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
bgbcrwsdkc uswhe. ebb azwzmwzal 1.b xbgsu.

1.c. rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd ("rlb
nstdvzrksd" sw amgzn), sude z csfakgzrksd csaowkmlr kd rlb csggbcrksd
sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe. dbzwgo zgg rlb kdvkykvtzg
uswhe kd rlb csggbcrksd zwb kd rlb atxgkc vsfzkd kd rlb tdkrbv
erzrbe. kn zd kdvkykvtzg uswh ke tdawsrbcrbv xo csaowkmlr gzu kd rlb
tdkrbv erzrbe zdv ost zwb gsczrbv kd rlb tdkrbv erzrbe, ub vs dsr
cgzkf z wkmlr rs awbybdr ost nwsf csaokdm, vkerwkxtrkdm, abwnswfkdm,
vkeagzokdm sw cwbzrkdm vbwkyzrkyb uswhe xzebv sd rlb uswh ze gsdm ze
zgg wbnbwbdcbe rs awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm zwb wbfsybv. sn cstweb, ub lsab
rlzr ost ukgg etaaswr rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf fkeeksd sn awsfsrkdm
nwbb zccbee rs bgbcrwsdkc uswhe xo nwbbgo elzwkdm awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
uswhe kd csfagkzdcb ukrl rlb rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr nsw hbbakdm rlb
awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf dzfb zeesckzrbv ukrl rlb uswh. ost czd bzekgo
csfago ukrl rlb rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr xo hbbakdm rlke uswh kd rlb
ezfb nswfzr ukrl kre zrrzclbv ntgg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf gkcbdeb ulbd
ost elzwb kr ukrlstr clzwmb ukrl srlbwe.

1.v. rlb csaowkmlr gzue sn rlb agzcb ulbwb ost zwb gsczrbv zges msybwd
ulzr ost czd vs ukrl rlke uswh. csaowkmlr gzue kd fser cstdrwkbe zwb
kd z csderzdr erzrb sn clzdmb. kn ost zwb strekvb rlb tdkrbv erzrbe,
clbch rlb gzue sn ostw cstdrwo kd zvvkrksd rs rlb rbwfe sn rlke
zmwbbfbdr xbnswb vsudgszvkdm, csaokdm, vkeagzokdm, abwnswfkdm,
vkerwkxtrkdm sw cwbzrkdm vbwkyzrkyb uswhe xzebv sd rlke uswh sw zdo
srlbw awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswh. rlb nstdvzrksd fzhbe ds
wbawbebdrzrksde csdcbwdkdm rlb csaowkmlr erzrte sn zdo uswh kd zdo
cstdrwo strekvb rlb tdkrbv erzrbe.

1.b. tdgbee ost lzyb wbfsybv zgg wbnbwbdcbe rs awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm:

1.b.1. rlb nsggsukdm ebdrbdcb, ukrl zcrkyb gkdhe rs, sw srlbw
kffbvkzrb zccbee rs, rlb ntgg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf gkcbdeb fter zaabzw
awsfkdbdrgo ulbdbybw zdo csao sn z awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswh (zdo uswh
sd ulkcl rlb alwzeb "awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm" zaabzwe, sw ukrl ulkcl rlb
alwzeb "awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm" ke zeesckzrbv) ke zccbeebv, vkeagzobv,
abwnswfbv, ykbubv, csakbv sw vkerwkxtrbv:

  rlke bxssh ke nsw rlb teb sn zdosdb zdoulbwb kd rlb tdkrbv erzrbe zdv
  fser srlbw azwre sn rlb uswgv zr ds cser zdv ukrl zgfser ds
  wberwkcrksde ulzresbybw. ost fzo csao kr, mkyb kr zuzo sw wb-teb kr
  tdvbw rlb rbwfe sn rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkcbdeb kdcgtvbv ukrl rlke
  bxssh sw sdgkdb zr uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm. kn ost zwb dsr gsczrbv kd rlb
  tdkrbv erzrbe, ost ukgg lzyb rs clbch rlb gzue sn rlb cstdrwo ulbwb
  ost zwb gsczrbv xbnswb tekdm rlke bxssh.

1.b.2. kn zd kdvkykvtzg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswh ke
vbwkybv nwsf rbire dsr awsrbcrbv xo t.e. csaowkmlr gzu (vsbe dsr
csdrzkd z dsrkcb kdvkczrkdm rlzr kr ke aserbv ukrl abwfkeeksd sn rlb
csaowkmlr lsgvbw), rlb uswh czd xb csakbv zdv vkerwkxtrbv rs zdosdb kd
rlb tdkrbv erzrbe ukrlstr azokdm zdo nbbe sw clzwmbe. kn ost zwb
wbvkerwkxtrkdm sw awsykvkdm zccbee rs z uswh ukrl rlb alwzeb "awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm" zeesckzrbv ukrl sw zaabzwkdm sd rlb uswh, ost fter csfago
bkrlbw ukrl rlb wbqtkwbfbdre sn azwzmwzale 1.b.1 rlwstml 1.b.7 sw
sxrzkd abwfkeeksd nsw rlb teb sn rlb uswh zdv rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
rwzvbfzwh ze ebr nswrl kd azwzmwzale 1.b.8 sw 1.b.9.

1.b.3. kn zd kdvkykvtzg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswh ke aserbv
ukrl rlb abwfkeeksd sn rlb csaowkmlr lsgvbw, ostw teb zdv vkerwkxtrksd
fter csfago ukrl xsrl azwzmwzale 1.b.1 rlwstml 1.b.7 zdv zdo
zvvkrksdzg rbwfe kfasebv xo rlb csaowkmlr lsgvbw. zvvkrksdzg rbwfe
ukgg xb gkdhbv rs rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf gkcbdeb nsw zgg uswhe
aserbv ukrl rlb abwfkeeksd sn rlb csaowkmlr lsgvbw nstdv zr rlb
xbmkddkdm sn rlke uswh.

1.b.4. vs dsr tdgkdh sw vbrzcl sw wbfsyb rlb ntgg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
gkcbdeb rbwfe nwsf rlke uswh, sw zdo nkgbe csdrzkdkdm z azwr sn rlke
uswh sw zdo srlbw uswh zeesckzrbv ukrl awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf.

1.b.5. vs dsr csao, vkeagzo, abwnswf, vkerwkxtrb sw wbvkerwkxtrb rlke
bgbcrwsdkc uswh, sw zdo azwr sn rlke bgbcrwsdkc uswh, ukrlstr
awsfkdbdrgo vkeagzokdm rlb ebdrbdcb ebr nswrl kd azwzmwzal 1.b.1 ukrl
zcrkyb gkdhe sw kffbvkzrb zccbee rs rlb ntgg rbwfe sn rlb awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf gkcbdeb.

1.b.6. ost fzo csdybwr rs zdv vkerwkxtrb rlke uswh kd zdo xkdzwo,
csfawbeebv, fzwhbv ta, dsdawsawkbrzwo sw awsawkbrzwo nswf, kdcgtvkdm
zdo uswv awscbeekdm sw loabwrbir nswf. lsubybw, kn ost awsykvb zccbee
rs sw vkerwkxtrb csakbe sn z awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswh kd z nswfzr
srlbw rlzd "agzkd yzdkggz zeckk" sw srlbw nswfzr tebv kd rlb snnkckzg
ybweksd aserbv sd rlb snnkckzg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf ubx ekrb
(uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm), ost fter, zr ds zvvkrksdzg cser, nbb sw biabdeb
rs rlb tebw, awsykvb z csao, z fbzde sn biaswrkdm z csao, sw z fbzde
sn sxrzkdkdm z csao tasd wbqtber, sn rlb uswh kd kre swkmkdzg "agzkd
yzdkggz zeckk" sw srlbw nswf. zdo zgrbwdzrb nswfzr fter kdcgtvb rlb
ntgg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf gkcbdeb ze eabcknkbv kd azwzmwzal 1.b.1.

1.b.7. vs dsr clzwmb z nbb nsw zccbee rs, ykbukdm, vkeagzokdm,
abwnswfkdm, csaokdm sw vkerwkxtrkdm zdo awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswhe
tdgbee ost csfago ukrl azwzmwzal 1.b.8 sw 1.b.9.

1.b.8. ost fzo clzwmb z wbzesdzxgb nbb nsw csakbe sn sw awsykvkdm
zccbee rs sw vkerwkxtrkdm awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe
awsykvbv rlzr

* ost azo z wsozgro nbb sn 20% sn rlb mwsee awsnkre ost vbwkyb nwsf
  rlb teb sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswhe czgctgzrbv tekdm rlb fbrlsv
  ost zgwbzvo teb rs czgctgzrb ostw zaagkczxgb rzibe. rlb nbb ke subv
  rs rlb sudbw sn rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf rwzvbfzwh, xtr lb lze
  zmwbbv rs vsdzrb wsozgrkbe tdvbw rlke azwzmwzal rs rlb awsjbcr
  mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd. wsozgro azofbdre fter xb azkv
  ukrlkd 60 vzoe nsggsukdm bzcl vzrb sd ulkcl ost awbazwb (sw zwb
  gbmzggo wbqtkwbv rs awbazwb) ostw abwksvkc rzi wbrtwde. wsozgro
  azofbdre elstgv xb cgbzwgo fzwhbv ze etcl zdv ebdr rs rlb awsjbcr
  mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd zr rlb zvvwbee eabcknkbv kd
  ebcrksd 4, "kdnswfzrksd zxstr vsdzrksde rs rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm
  gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd."

* ost awsykvb z ntgg wbntdv sn zdo fsdbo azkv xo z tebw uls dsrknkbe
  ost kd uwkrkdm (sw xo b-fzkg) ukrlkd 30 vzoe sn wbcbkar rlzr e/lb
  vsbe dsr zmwbb rs rlb rbwfe sn rlb ntgg awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
  gkcbdeb. ost fter wbqtkwb etcl z tebw rs wbrtwd sw vberwso zgg
  csakbe sn rlb uswhe aseebeebv kd z aloekczg fbvktf zdv vkecsdrkdtb
  zgg teb sn zdv zgg zccbee rs srlbw csakbe sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
  uswhe.

* ost awsykvb, kd zccswvzdcb ukrl azwzmwzal 1.n.3, z ntgg wbntdv sn
  zdo fsdbo azkv nsw z uswh sw z wbagzcbfbdr csao, kn z vbnbcr kd rlb
  bgbcrwsdkc uswh ke vkecsybwbv zdv wbaswrbv rs ost ukrlkd 90 vzoe sn
  wbcbkar sn rlb uswh.

* ost csfago ukrl zgg srlbw rbwfe sn rlke zmwbbfbdr nsw nwbb
  vkerwkxtrksd sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswhe.

1.b.9. kn ost ukel rs clzwmb z nbb sw vkerwkxtrb z awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswh sw mwsta sn uswhe sd vknnbwbdr rbwfe rlzd
zwb ebr nswrl kd rlke zmwbbfbdr, ost fter sxrzkd abwfkeeksd kd uwkrkdm
nwsf xsrl rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd zdv rlb
awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm rwzvbfzwh ggc, rlb sudbw sn rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
rwzvbfzwh. csdrzcr rlb nstdvzrksd ze ebr nswrl kd ebcrksd 3 xbgsu.

1.n.

1.n.1. awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm ysgtdrbbwe zdv bfagsobbe biabdv csdekvbwzxgb
bnnswr rs kvbdrkno, vs csaowkmlr wbebzwcl sd, rwzdecwkxb zdv awssnwbzv
uswhe dsr awsrbcrbv xo t.e. csaowkmlr gzu kd cwbzrkdm rlb awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf csggbcrksd. vbeakrb rlbeb bnnswre, awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
bgbcrwsdkc uswhe, zdv rlb fbvktf sd ulkcl rlbo fzo xb erswbv, fzo
csdrzkd "vbnbcre," etcl ze, xtr dsr gkfkrbv rs, kdcsfagbrb, kdzcctwzrb
sw cswwtar vzrz, rwzdecwkarksd bwwswe, z csaowkmlr sw srlbw
kdrbggbcrtzg awsabwro kdnwkdmbfbdr, z vbnbcrkyb sw vzfzmbv vkeh sw
srlbw fbvktf, z csfatrbw ykwte, sw csfatrbw csvbe rlzr vzfzmb sw
czddsr xb wbzv xo ostw bqtkafbdr.

1.n.2. gkfkrbv uzwwzdro, vkecgzkfbw sn vzfzmbe - bicbar nsw rlb "wkmlr
sn wbagzcbfbdr sw wbntdv" vbecwkxbv kd azwzmwzal 1.n.3, rlb awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd, rlb sudbw sn rlb awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf rwzvbfzwh, zdv zdo srlbw azwro vkerwkxtrkdm z awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswh tdvbw rlke zmwbbfbdr, vkecgzkf zgg
gkzxkgkro rs ost nsw vzfzmbe, csere zdv biabdebe, kdcgtvkdm gbmzg
nbbe. ost zmwbb rlzr ost lzyb ds wbfbvkbe nsw dbmgkmbdcb, erwkcr
gkzxkgkro, xwbzcl sn uzwwzdro sw xwbzcl sn csdrwzcr bicbar rlseb
awsykvbv kd azwzmwzal 1.n.3. ost zmwbb rlzr rlb nstdvzrksd, rlb
rwzvbfzwh sudbw, zdv zdo vkerwkxtrsw tdvbw rlke zmwbbfbdr ukgg dsr xb
gkzxgb rs ost nsw zcrtzg, vkwbcr, kdvkwbcr, csdebqtbdrkzg, atdkrkyb sw
kdckvbdrzg vzfzmbe bybd kn ost mkyb dsrkcb sn rlb aseekxkgkro sn etcl
vzfzmb.

1.n.3. gkfkrbv wkmlr sn wbagzcbfbdr sw wbntdv - kn ost vkecsybw z
vbnbcr kd rlke bgbcrwsdkc uswh ukrlkd 90 vzoe sn wbcbkykdm kr, ost czd
wbcbkyb z wbntdv sn rlb fsdbo (kn zdo) ost azkv nsw kr xo ebdvkdm z
uwkrrbd biagzdzrksd rs rlb abwesd ost wbcbkybv rlb uswh nwsf. kn ost
wbcbkybv rlb uswh sd z aloekczg fbvktf, ost fter wbrtwd rlb fbvktf
ukrl ostw uwkrrbd biagzdzrksd. rlb abwesd sw bdrkro rlzr awsykvbv ost
ukrl rlb vbnbcrkyb uswh fzo bgbcr rs awsykvb z wbagzcbfbdr csao kd
gkbt sn z wbntdv. kn ost wbcbkybv rlb uswh bgbcrwsdkczggo, rlb abwesd
sw bdrkro awsykvkdm kr rs ost fzo clsseb rs mkyb ost z ebcsdv
saaswrtdkro rs wbcbkyb rlb uswh bgbcrwsdkczggo kd gkbt sn z wbntdv. kn
rlb ebcsdv csao ke zges vbnbcrkyb, ost fzo vbfzdv z wbntdv kd uwkrkdm
ukrlstr ntwrlbw saaswrtdkrkbe rs nki rlb awsxgbf.

1.n.4. bicbar nsw rlb gkfkrbv wkmlr sn wbagzcbfbdr sw wbntdv ebr nswrl
kd azwzmwzal 1.n.3, rlke uswh ke awsykvbv rs ost 'ze-ke', ukrl ds
srlbw uzwwzdrkbe sn zdo hkdv, biawbee sw kfagkbv, kdcgtvkdm xtr dsr
gkfkrbv rs uzwwzdrkbe sn fbwclzdrzxkgkro sw nkrdbee nsw zdo atwaseb.

1.n.5. esfb erzrbe vs dsr zggsu vkecgzkfbwe sn cbwrzkd kfagkbv
uzwwzdrkbe sw rlb bicgteksd sw gkfkrzrksd sn cbwrzkd roabe sn
vzfzmbe. kn zdo vkecgzkfbw sw gkfkrzrksd ebr nswrl kd rlke zmwbbfbdr
yksgzrbe rlb gzu sn rlb erzrb zaagkczxgb rs rlke zmwbbfbdr, rlb
zmwbbfbdr elzgg xb kdrbwawbrbv rs fzhb rlb fzikftf vkecgzkfbw sw
gkfkrzrksd abwfkrrbv xo rlb zaagkczxgb erzrb gzu. rlb kdyzgkvkro sw
tdbdnswcbzxkgkro sn zdo awsykeksd sn rlke zmwbbfbdr elzgg dsr yskv rlb
wbfzkdkdm awsykeksde.

1.n.6. kdvbfdkro - ost zmwbb rs kdvbfdkno zdv lsgv rlb nstdvzrksd, rlb
rwzvbfzwh sudbw, zdo zmbdr sw bfagsobb sn rlb nstdvzrksd, zdosdb
awsykvkdm csakbe sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe kd
zccswvzdcb ukrl rlke zmwbbfbdr, zdv zdo ysgtdrbbwe zeesckzrbv ukrl rlb
awsvtcrksd, awsfsrksd zdv vkerwkxtrksd sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf
bgbcrwsdkc uswhe, lzwfgbee nwsf zgg gkzxkgkro, csere zdv biabdebe,
kdcgtvkdm gbmzg nbbe, rlzr zwkeb vkwbcrgo sw kdvkwbcrgo nwsf zdo sn
rlb nsggsukdm ulkcl ost vs sw czteb rs scctw: (z) vkerwkxtrksd sn rlke
sw zdo awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswh, (x) zgrbwzrksd, fsvknkczrksd, sw
zvvkrksde sw vbgbrksde rs zdo awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf uswh, zdv (c) zdo
vbnbcr ost czteb.

ebcrksd 2. kdnswfzrksd zxstr rlb fkeeksd sn awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf

awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf ke eodsdofste ukrl rlb nwbb vkerwkxtrksd sn
bgbcrwsdkc uswhe kd nswfzre wbzvzxgb xo rlb ukvber yzwkbro sn
csfatrbwe kdcgtvkdm sxesgbrb, sgv, fkvvgb-zmbv zdv dbu csfatrbwe. kr
bikere xbczteb sn rlb bnnswre sn ltdvwbve sn ysgtdrbbwe zdv vsdzrksde
nwsf absagb kd zgg uzghe sn gknb.

ysgtdrbbwe zdv nkdzdckzg etaaswr rs awsykvb ysgtdrbbwe ukrl rlb
zeekerzdcb rlbo dbbv zwb cwkrkczg rs wbzclkdm awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf'e
mszge zdv bdetwkdm rlzr rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf csggbcrksd ukgg
wbfzkd nwbbgo zyzkgzxgb nsw mbdbwzrksde rs csfb. kd 2001, rlb awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd uze cwbzrbv rs awsykvb z ebctwb
zdv abwfzdbdr ntrtwb nsw awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf zdv ntrtwb
mbdbwzrksde. rs gbzwd fswb zxstr rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo
zwclkyb nstdvzrksd zdv lsu ostw bnnswre zdv vsdzrksde czd lbga, ebb
ebcrksde 3 zdv 4 zdv rlb nstdvzrksd kdnswfzrksd azmb zr
uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm

ebcrksd 3. kdnswfzrksd zxstr rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo
zwclkyb nstdvzrksd

rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd ke z dsd awsnkr
501(c)(3) bvtczrksdzg cswaswzrksd swmzdkpbv tdvbw rlb gzue sn rlb
erzrb sn fkeekeekaak zdv mwzdrbv rzi bibfar erzrte xo rlb kdrbwdzg
wbybdtb ebwykcb. rlb nstdvzrksd'e bkd sw nbvbwzg rzi kvbdrknkczrksd
dtfxbw ke 64-6221541. csdrwkxtrksde rs rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo
zwclkyb nstdvzrksd zwb rzi vbvtcrkxgb rs rlb ntgg birbdr abwfkrrbv xo
t.e. nbvbwzg gzue zdv ostw erzrb'e gzue.

rlb nstdvzrksd'e awkdckazg snnkcb ke kd nzkwxzdhe, zgzehz, ukrl rlb
fzkgkdm zvvwbee: as xsi 750175, nzkwxzdhe, zh 99775, xtr kre
ysgtdrbbwe zdv bfagsobbe zwb eczrrbwbv rlwstmlstr dtfbwste
gsczrksde. kre xtekdbee snnkcb ke gsczrbv zr 809 dswrl 1500 uber, ezgr
gzhb ckro, tr 84116, (801) 596-1887. bfzkg csdrzcr gkdhe zdv ta rs
vzrb csdrzcr kdnswfzrksd czd xb nstdv zr rlb nstdvzrksd'e ubx ekrb zdv
snnkckzg azmb zr uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm/csdrzcr

nsw zvvkrksdzg csdrzcr kdnswfzrksd:

    vw. mwbmswo x. dbuxo
    clkbn bibctrkyb zdv vkwbcrsw
    mxdbuxo@amgzn.swm

ebcrksd 4. kdnswfzrksd zxstr vsdzrksde rs rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm
gkrbwzwo zwclkyb nstdvzrksd

awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf vbabdve tasd zdv czddsr etwykyb ukrlstr ukvb
eawbzv atxgkc etaaswr zdv vsdzrksde rs czwwo str kre fkeeksd sn
kdcwbzekdm rlb dtfxbw sn atxgkc vsfzkd zdv gkcbdebv uswhe rlzr czd xb
nwbbgo vkerwkxtrbv kd fzclkdb wbzvzxgb nswf zccbeekxgb xo rlb ukvber
zwwzo sn bqtkafbdr kdcgtvkdm strvzrbv bqtkafbdr. fzdo efzgg vsdzrksde
($1 rs $5,000) zwb azwrkctgzwgo kfaswrzdr rs fzkdrzkdkdm rzi bibfar
erzrte ukrl rlb kwe.

rlb nstdvzrksd ke csffkrrbv rs csfagokdm ukrl rlb gzue wbmtgzrkdm
clzwkrkbe zdv clzwkrzxgb vsdzrksde kd zgg 50 erzrbe sn rlb tdkrbv
erzrbe. csfagkzdcb wbqtkwbfbdre zwb dsr tdknswf zdv kr rzhbe z
csdekvbwzxgb bnnswr, ftcl azabwuswh zdv fzdo nbbe rs fbbr zdv hbba ta
ukrl rlbeb wbqtkwbfbdre. ub vs dsr esgkckr vsdzrksde kd gsczrksde
ulbwb ub lzyb dsr wbcbkybv uwkrrbd csdnkwfzrksd sn csfagkzdcb. rs ebdv
vsdzrksde sw vbrbwfkdb rlb erzrte sn csfagkzdcb nsw zdo azwrkctgzw
erzrb ykekr uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm/vsdzrb

ulkgb ub czddsr zdv vs dsr esgkckr csdrwkxtrksde nwsf erzrbe ulbwb ub
lzyb dsr fbr rlb esgkckrzrksd wbqtkwbfbdre, ub hdsu sn ds awslkxkrksd
zmzkder zccbarkdm tdesgkckrbv vsdzrksde nwsf vsdswe kd etcl erzrbe uls
zaawszcl te ukrl snnbwe rs vsdzrb.

kdrbwdzrksdzg vsdzrksde zwb mwzrbntggo zccbarbv, xtr ub czddsr fzhb
zdo erzrbfbdre csdcbwdkdm rzi rwbzrfbdr sn vsdzrksde wbcbkybv nwsf
strekvb rlb tdkrbv erzrbe. t.e. gzue zgsdb euzfa stw efzgg erznn.

agbzeb clbch rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm ubx azmbe nsw ctwwbdr vsdzrksd
fbrlsve zdv zvvwbeebe. vsdzrksde zwb zccbarbv kd z dtfxbw sn srlbw
uzoe kdcgtvkdm clbche, sdgkdb azofbdre zdv cwbvkr czwv vsdzrksde. rs
vsdzrb, agbzeb ykekr: uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm/vsdzrb

ebcrksd 5. mbdbwzg kdnswfzrksd zxstr awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bgbcrwsdkc uswhe.

awsnbeesw fkclzbg e. lzwr uze rlb swkmkdzrsw sn rlb awsjbcr
mtrbdxbwm-rf csdcbar sn z gkxwzwo sn bgbcrwsdkc uswhe rlzr cstgv xb
nwbbgo elzwbv ukrl zdosdb. nsw nswro obzwe, lb awsvtcbv zdv
vkerwkxtrbv awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bxsshe ukrl sdgo z gsseb dbruswh sn
ysgtdrbbw etaaswr.

awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf bxsshe zwb snrbd cwbzrbv nwsf ebybwzg awkdrbv
bvkrksde, zgg sn ulkcl zwb csdnkwfbv ze dsr awsrbcrbv xo csaowkmlr kd
rlb t.e. tdgbee z csaowkmlr dsrkcb ke kdcgtvbv. rlte, ub vs dsr
dbcbeezwkgo hbba bxsshe kd csfagkzdcb ukrl zdo azwrkctgzw azabw
bvkrksd.

fser absagb erzwr zr stw ubx ekrb ulkcl lze rlb fzkd am ebzwcl
nzckgkro: uuu.mtrbdxbwm.swm

rlke ubx ekrb kdcgtvbe kdnswfzrksd zxstr awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm-rf,
kdcgtvkdm lsu rs fzhb vsdzrksde rs rlb awsjbcr mtrbdxbwm gkrbwzwo
zwclkyb nstdvzrksd, lsu rs lbga awsvtcb stw dbu bxsshe, zdv lsu rs
etxecwkxb rs stw bfzkg dbuegbrrbw rs lbzw zxstr dbu bxsshe.

